Citation Nr: 0413629	
Decision Date: 05/27/04    Archive Date: 06/02/04

DOCKET NO.  01-02 694A	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in 
Indianapolis, Indiana


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

Jason G. Wodogaza, Associate Counsel





INTRODUCTION

The appellant had active military service from March 1968 
until November 1970.

This matter comes before the Board of Veteran's Appeals 
(Board) on appeal from an August 2000 rating decision of the 
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in 
Detroit, Michigan, which denied service connection for post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  The Board additionally 
notes that the appellant, in his September 2002 
correspondence, indicated that his current residence was in 
Indiana.  Accordingly, the claims file as well as 
jurisdiction was transferred to the Indianapolis Regional 
Office.

The appellant requested a Decision Review Officer (DRO) 
hearing in this case, which was conducted in March 2001.


FINDING OF FACT

The appellant is not a veteran of combat, and he did not 
experience a verified stressor event.

CONCLUSION OF LAW

The criteria for entitlement to service connection for post-
traumatic stress disorder are not met.  38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 
5107 (West 2002); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.303, 3.304(f) (2003).






REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSION

I.  Veterans Claims Assistance Act

The provisions of the Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 
(VCAA), codified at 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5102, 5103, 5103A, 5107 
(West 2002), and its implementing regulations, codified at 
38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 3.156(a), 3.159 and 3.326 (2003), are 
applicable to the appellant's claim of entitlement to service 
connection for PTSD.  This law redefines the obligations of 
VA with respect to the duty to assist and includes an 
enhanced duty to notify a claimant as to the information and 
evidence necessary to substantiate a claim for VA benefits.

First, VA has a duty to notify the appellant and his 
representative of any information and evidence needed to 
substantiate and complete a claim.  38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5102, 5103 
(West 2002); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(b) (2003).  Information means 
non-evidentiary facts, such as the claimant's address and 
Social Security number or the name and address of a medical 
care provider who may have evidence pertinent to the claim.  
See 66 Fed. Reg. 45620, 45630 (August 29, 2001); 38 C.F.R. 
§ 3.159(a)(5) (2003).  Second, VA has a duty to assist the 
appellant in obtaining evidence necessary to substantiate the 
claim.  38 U.S.C.A. § 5103A (West 2002); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) 
(2003).

The record indicates that the appellant has been fully 
apprised of what evidence would be necessary to substantiate 
the claims, as well as informed of the specific assignment of 
responsibility for obtaining such evidence.  38 U.S.C.A. § 
5103(a); Quartuccio v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002).  
The August 2000 rating decision on appeal, the statement of 
the case (SOC), supplemental statements of the case (SSOC's), 
and multiple supplemental correspondence, together have 
adequately informed the appellant of the types of evidence 
needed to substantiate his claim.  

The appellant was advised of the evidence which would 
substantiate his claim, and the responsibility for obtaining 
it, by letter dated in January 2000.  The letter informed the 
appellant what evidence and information VA would be obtaining 
as well as the evidence that the appellant needed to provide.  
The letter explained that VA would make reasonable efforts to 
help him get evidence such as medical records, employment 
records, etc., but that he was responsible for providing 
sufficient information to VA to identify the custodian of any 
records.  The Board additionally notes that the January 2000 
duty to assist letter informed the appellant of the legal 
elements of a service connection claim in general as well as 
a PTSD claim specifically.

In specific compliance with Quartuccio, in February 2001, 
October 2002, and July 2003, the RO sent letters to the 
appellant explaining the recent enactment of the VCAA and its 
application to his claim of entitlement to service connection 
for PTSD.  These letters reiterated what evidence and 
information VA would be obtaining as well as the evidence 
that the appellant needed to provide.  These letters not only 
informed the appellant of the legal requirements for service 
connection, but they also informed him of the evidence 
necessary to substantiate his claim for PTSD.

With respect to the timing of the VCAA notification, the 
Board notes that the initial adjudication of the appellant's 
claim took place in August 2000, or prior to the February 
2001, October 2002, and July 2003 VCAA notification letters.  
Recent case law suggests that VCAA notice, as required by 
38 U.S.C. § 5103(a), must be provided to a claimant before 
the initial unfavorable agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ) 
decision on a claim for VA benefits.  Pelegrini v. Principi, 
17 Vet. App. 412 (2004).  Although the timing of the VCAA 
notification in this case does not comply with the explicit 
requirements of Pelegrini, the Court did not address whether, 
and if so, how, the Secretary can properly cure a defect in 
the timing of the VCAA notice.  Furthermore, the Court left 
open the possibility that a notice error of this kind may be 
non-prejudicial to a claimant.

For example, the Court in Pelegrini found, on the one hand, 
that the failure to provide the notice until after a claimant 
has already received an initial unfavorable AOJ 
determination, i.e., a denial of the claim, would largely 
nullify the purpose of the notice and, as such, prejudice the 
claimant by forcing him or her to overcome an adverse 
decision, as well as substantially impair the orderly 
sequence of claims development and adjudication.  Id. at 422.  
Conversely, the Court acknowledged that the Secretary could 
show that the lack of a pre-AOJ decision notice was not 
prejudicial to the appellant.  Id. ("The Secretary has 
failed to demonstrate that, in this case, lack of such a pre-
AOJ-decision notice was not prejudicial to the appellant.")

The Court in Pelegrini appears to have left open the 
possibility of a notice error being found to be non-
prejudicial to a claimant - a contrary finding would require 
the Board to remand every case for the purpose of having the 
AOJ provide a pre-initial adjudication notice.  Furthermore, 
providing such a notice would mandate all prior adjudications 
be vacated, as well as nullifying the notice of disagreement 
and substantive appeal that were filed by the appellant to 
perfect the appeal to the Board.  Such interpretation of 
section 5103(a) is incompatible with the best interests of 
the appellant, as it would result in a substantial delay in 
readjudicating his claim.  Therefore, consistent with the 
requirements of the VCAA, the appellant was afforded the 
opportunity to submit information and evidence in support of 
his claim.  Thus, all due process concerns have been 
satisfied.  See Bernard v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 384 (1993); 
Sutton v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 553 (1996); see also 38 C.F.R. 
§ 20.1102 (2003) (harmless error).

The VCAA notification letters are legally sufficient.  See 
Paralyzed Veterans of America, et. al. v. Secretary of 
Department of Veterans Affairs (PVA), Nos. 02-7007, -7008, -
7009, -7010 (Fed. Cir. September 22, 2003); Disabled American 
Veterans, et. al. v. Secretary of Department of Veterans 
Affairs (DAV), 327 F.3d 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2003).  The Federal 
Circuit has held that 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.159(b)(1) 
and 19.9(a)(2)(ii) are invalid to the extent they provide a 
claimant "not less than 30 days" to respond to a VCAA 
notification letter because the regulations are contrary to 
38 U.S.C.A. § 5103(b), which provides a claimant one year to 
submit evidence.  However, the statute was recently amended 
to permit VA to adjudicate a claim within one-year of receipt 
of the claim.  Veterans Benefits Act of 2003, Pub. L. No. 
108-183, 117 Stat. 2651 (Dec. 16, 2003).  Therefore, the 
claimant was notified properly of his statutory rights.

With respect to VA's duty to assist the appellant, the RO 
requested and obtained the appellant's service medical and 
personnel records from the National Personnel Records Center 
(NPRC).  The record also includes VA medical records, private 
medical records, DRO hearing transcript, and the appellant's 
own contentions.  Accordingly, VA has no outstanding duty to 
assist the appellant in obtaining any additional information 
or evidence.  At every stage of the process, the appellant 
was informed of the information needed to substantiate his 
claim, and VA has obtained all evidence identified by the 
appellant.  The Board finds that all indicated medical 
records have been obtained and the appellant has not 
referenced any outstanding records or information that he 
wanted VA to obtain.

The duty to assist also includes providing a medical 
examination or obtaining a medical opinion when such is 
necessary to make a decision on the claim.  An examination or 
opinion is necessary if the evidence of record:  (A) contains 
competent evidence that the claimant has a current 
disability, or persistent or recurrent symptoms of 
disability; (B) establishes that the claimant suffered an 
event, injury or disease in service; and (C) indicates that 
the claimed disability or symptoms may be associated with the 
established event, injury, or disease in service or with 
another service-connected disability, but (D) does not 
contain sufficient medical evidence for the Secretary to make 
a decision on the claim.  38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c)(4) (2003).

The appellant in this case was not previously afforded a VA 
examination with respect to the issue on appeal.  As 
discussed in further detail below, the evidence shows that 
the appellant is currently diagnosed with PTSD; however, the 
evidence does not show a verified in-service stressor or a 
link between the in-service stressor and the appellant's 
current PTSD.  Therefore, in the absence of such evidence the 
duty to assist does not require the appellant be afforded a 
VA examination in this case.

Thus, the record indicates that VA has done everything 
reasonably possible to assist the appellant.  In the 
circumstances of this case, additional efforts to assist him 
in accordance with the VCAA would serve no useful purpose.  
See Soyini v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 540, 546 (1991) (strict 
adherence to requirements in the law does not dictate an 
unquestioning, blind adherence in the face of overwhelming 
evidence in support of the result in a particular case; such 
adherence would result in unnecessarily imposing additional 
burdens on VA with no benefit flowing to the veteran); 
Sabonis v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 426, 430 (1994) (remands which 
would only result in unnecessarily imposing additional 
burdens on VA with no benefit flowing to the veteran are to 
be avoided).  VA has satisfied its duties to inform and 
assist the appellant at every stage of this case.


II.  Service Connection for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 
(PTSD)

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence 
diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 
4.125(a); a link, established by medical evidence, between 
current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and credible 
supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor 
occurred. 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.304(f) and 4.125 (requiring PTSD 
diagnoses to conform to the criteria in the DIAGNOSTIC AND 
STATISTICAL MANUAL OF MENTAL DISORDERS (4th ed. 1994) (DSM-
IV)).

With regard to the second PTSD element, that of an in-service 
stressor, the evidence necessary to establish that the 
claimed stressor actually varies depending on whether it can 
be determined that the veteran "engaged in combat with the 
enemy." 38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b); 38 C.F.R. 3.304(d). If it is 
determined through military citation or other supportive 
evidence that a veteran engaged in combat with the enemy, and 
the claimed stressors are related to combat, the veteran's 
lay testimony regarding the reported stressors must be 
accepted as conclusive evidence as to their actual occurrence 
and no further development or corroborative evidence will be 
necessary. 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

Where a determination is made that the veteran did not 
"engage in combat with the enemy," or the claimed stressor is 
not related to combat, the veteran's lay testimony alone will 
not be enough to establish the occurrence of the alleged 
stressor.  See Moreau v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 389, 395 (1996); 
Dizoglio v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 163, 166 (1996). In such 
cases, the record must contain service records or other 
statements as to the occurrence of the claimed stressor. See 
West (Carlton) v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 70, 76 (1994); Zarycki 
v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 91, 98 (1993). 

Once independent verification of the stressor event has been 
submitted, the veteran's personal exposure to the event may 
be implied by the evidence of record. A veteran need not 
substantiate his actual presence during the stressor event; 
the fact that the veteran was assigned to and stationed with 
a unit that was present while such an event occurred may 
strongly suggest that he was, in fact, exposed to the 
stressor event. See Pentecost v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 124 
(2002); Suozzi v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 307 (1997).

It is upon the third prong of a successful claim of service 
connection for PTSD (i.e., that of a verified stressor) that 
the appellant's claim fails.

The record in this matter does not reveal that the appellant 
is a veteran of combat.  His report of separation from the 
Armed Forces indicates that the appellant's military 
occupational specialty was an "asphalt sp[ecialist]," which 
is not a speciality presumed to be indicative of combat 
service.  The appellant's enlisted qualification record 
further indicates that for the entirety of his service in 
Vietnam, he served as a "quarry machine operator," 
"powerman," and asphalt distributor operator - none of 
these positions involving combat qualification or service.   

Similarly, the appellant's awards and decorations are not 
supportive of a finding of combat veteran status. The 
National Defense Service Medal awarded to the appellant is 
awarded for honorable active service for any period between 
June 27, 1950 and July 27, 1954, or between January 1, 1961 
and August 14, 1974.  See Manual of Military Decorations and 
Awards, 6-1 (Department of Defense Manual 1348.33-M, July 
1990).  

The Vietnam Service Medal is awarded to all members of the 
Armed Forces of the United States serving at any time between 
July 4, 1965 and March 28, 1973 in Thailand, Laos, or 
Cambodia or the airspaces thereover in direct support of 
operations in Vietnam.  Id. at 6-1.  An award of a Bronze 
Service Star for the Vietnam Service Medal is based upon 
"participation during" approved campaign periods."  Id. at 
6-6.  The appellant is not shown to have received the Bronze 
Service Star.  

The Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal is awarded to those 
personnel who (1) served in the Republic of Vietnam for 6 
months during a specified period; or, (2) served outside the 
geographical limits of the Republic of Vietnam but 
contributed direct combat support to the Republic of Vietnam 
and Armed Forces for 6 months; or, (3) served in the Republic 
of Vietnam or outside its geographical limits for less than 6 
months but were wounded, captured or killed.  See Army 
Regulation 672-5-1, 28.  

The appellant's military personnel records do not 
substantiate that he is a veteran of combat.  Further, 
research by the RO as to the appellant's claimed experiences 
in Vietnam has failed to substantiate such status.   

In a September 1999 PTSD questionnaire, the appellant stated 
that he witnessed a sergeant being killed and that he 
assisted in cleaning up the area and getting the remains out 
after a mortar attack on a Quonset hut.  The appellant has 
also reported that he witnessed three young girls being shot 
and killed by enemy forces.  

In August 2001, the appellant's account, and clarifying 
information as to his service assignment was forwarded to the 
U.S. Armed Services Center for Research of Unit Records 
(USASCRUR) for a search of substantiating information.  Later 
that month, the agency requested that the RO forward it 
additional information.  In April 2002, the RO provided 
additional details from the appellant, and resubmitted its 
request to USASCRUR.  In June 2002, the agency reported that 
it could not substantiate the appellant's claimed stressors.  
Additionally, in February 2004, the National Association of 
Records and Archives reported that it could not substantiate 
the appellant's account.     

Although the appellant was notified on several occasions to 
provide a more detailed description of the claimed in-service 
stressor event(s), he did not provide the name of the 
deceased sergeant nor the specific dates of the incidents 
which he claimed as stressors.  Thus, because the appellant 
is not shown to be a veteran of combat and no claimed 
stressor has been substantiated, his claim fails on this 
basis.  



ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) is denied.



	                        
____________________________________________
	VITO A. CLEMENTI
	Acting Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' Appeals



 Department of Veterans Affairs

YOUR RIGHTS TO APPEAL OUR DECISION

The attached decision by the Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA or Board) is 
the final decision for all issues addressed in the "Order" section of the 
decision.  The Board may also choose to remand an issue or issues to the 
local VA office for additional development.   If the Board did this in your 
case, then a "Remand" section follows the "Order."  However, you cannot 
appeal an issue remanded to the local VA office because a remand is not a 
final decision. The advice below on how to appeal a claim applies only to 
issues that were allowed, denied, or dismissed in the "Order."
If you are satisfied with the outcome of your appeal, you do not need to do 
anything.  We will return your file to your local VA office to implement 
the BVA's decision.  However, if you are not satisfied with the Board's 
decision on any or all of the issues allowed, denied, or dismissed, you 
have the following options, which are listed in no particular order of 
importance: 
?	Appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims 
(Court)
?	File with the Board a motion for reconsideration of this decision
?	File with the Board a motion to vacate this decision 
?	File with the Board a motion for revision of this decision based on 
clear and unmistakable error. 
Although it would not affect this BVA decision, you may choose to also: 
?	Reopen your claim at the local VA office by submitting new and 
material evidence. 
There is no time limit for filing a motion for reconsideration, a motion to 
vacate, or a motion for revision based on clear and unmistakable error with 
the Board, or a claim to reopen at the local VA office.  None of these 
things is mutually exclusive - you can do all five things at the same time 
if you wish.  However, if you file a Notice of Appeal with the Court and a 
motion with the Board at the same time, this may delay your case because of 
jurisdictional conflicts. If you file a Notice of Appeal with the Court 
before you file a motion with the BVA, the BVA will not be able to consider 
your motion without the Court's permission. 

How long do I have to start my appeal to the Court?  You have 120 days from 
the date this decision was mailed to you (as shown on the first page of 
this decision) to file a Notice of Appeal with the United States Court of 
Appeals for Veterans Claims.  If you also want to file a motion for 
reconsideration or a motion to vacate, you will still have time to appeal 
to the Court.  As long as you file your motion(s) with the Board within 120 
days of the date this decision was mailed to you, you will then have 
another 120 days from the date the BVA decides the motion for 
reconsideration or the motion to vacate to appeal to the Court.  You should 
know that even if you have a representative, as discussed below, it is your 
responsibility to make sure that your appeal to Court is filed on time.

How do I appeal to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims?  
Send your Notice of Appeal to the Court at:

Clerk, U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims
625 Indiana Avenue, NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20004-2950

You can get information about the Notice of Appeal, the procedure for 
filing a Notice of Appeal, the filing fee (or a motion to waive the filing 
fee if payment would cause financial hardship), and other matters covered 
by the Court's rules directly from the Court. You can also get this 
information from the Court's web site on the Internet at 
www.vetapp.uscourts.gov, and you can download forms directly from that 
website.  The Court's facsimile number is (202) 501-5848. 

To ensure full protection of your right of appeal to the Court, you must 
file your Notice of Appeal with the Court, not with the Board, or any other 
VA office. 

How do I file a motion for reconsideration? You can file a motion asking 
the BVA to reconsider any part of this decision by writing a letter to the 
BVA stating why you believe that the BVA committed an obvious error of fact 
or law in this decision, or stating that new and material military service 
records have been discovered that apply to your appeal. If the BVA has 
decided more than one issue, be sure to tell us which issue(s) you want 
reconsidered. Send your letter to: 
Director, Management and Administration (014)
Board of Veterans' Appeals
810 Vermont Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20420

VA 
FORM
JUN 
2003 
(RS) 
 
4597
Page 
1
CONTINUED



Remember, the Board places no time limit on filing a motion for 
reconsideration, and you can do this at any time. However, if you also plan 
to appeal this decision to the Court, you must file your motion within 120 
days from the date of this decision. 

How do I file a motion to vacate? You can file a motion asking the BVA to 
vacate any part of this decision by writing a letter to the BVA stating why 
you believe you were denied due process of law during your appeal. For 
example, you were denied your right to representation through action or 
inaction by VA personnel, you were not provided a Statement of the Case or 
Supplemental Statement of the Case, or you did not get a personal hearing 
that you requested. You can also file a motion to vacate any part of this 
decision on the basis that the Board allowed benefits based on false or 
fraudulent evidence.  Send this motion to the address above for the 
Director, Management and Administration, at the Board.  Remember, the Board 
places no time limit on filing a motion to vacate, and you can do this at 
any time. However, if you also plan to appeal this decision to the Court, 
you must file your motion within 120 days from the date of this decision. 

How do I file a motion to revise the Board's decision on the basis of clear 
and unmistakable error? You can file a motion asking that the Board revise 
this decision if you believe that the decision is based on "clear and 
unmistakable error" (CUE).  Send this motion to the address above for the 
Director, Management and Administration, at the Board. You should be 
careful when preparing such a motion because it must meet specific 
requirements, and the Board will not review a final decision on this basis 
more than once. You should carefully review the Board's Rules of Practice 
on CUE, 38 C.F.R. 20.1400 -- 20.1411, and seek help from a qualified 
representative before filing such a motion. See discussion on 
representation below. Remember, the Board places no time limit on filing a 
CUE review motion, and you can do this at any time. 

How do I reopen my claim? You can ask your local VA office to reopen your 
claim by simply sending them a statement indicating that you want to reopen 
your claim.  However, to be successful in reopening your claim, you must 
submit new and material evidence to that office. See 38 C.F.R. 3.156(a). 

Can someone represent me in my appeal?  Yes. You can always represent 
yourself in any claim before VA, including the BVA, but you can also 
appoint someone to represent you.  An accredited representative of a 
recognized service organization may represent you free of charge.  VA 
approves these organizations to help veterans, service members, and 
dependents prepare their claims and present them to VA. An accredited 
representative works for the service organization and knows how to prepare 
and present claims. You can find a listing of these organizations on the 
Internet at: www.va.gov/vso.  You can also choose to be represented by a 
private attorney or by an "agent." (An agent is a person who is not a 
lawyer, but is specially accredited by VA.) 

If you want someone to represent you before the Court, rather than before 
VA, then you can get information on how to do so by writing directly to the 
Court.  Upon request, the Court will provide you with a state-by-state 
listing of persons admitted to practice before the Court who have indicated 
their availability to represent appellants.  This information is also 
provided on the Court's website at www.vetapp.uscourts.gov. 

Do I have to pay an attorney or agent to represent me?  Except for a claim 
involving a home or small business VA loan under Chapter 37 of title 38, 
United States Code, attorneys or agents cannot charge you a fee or accept 
payment for services they provide before the date BVA makes a final 
decision on your appeal. If you hire an attorney or accredited agent within 
1 year of a final BVA decision, then the attorney or agent is allowed to 
charge you a fee for representing you before VA in most situations.  An 
attorney can also charge you for representing you before the Court.  VA 
cannot pay fees of attorneys or agents. 

Fee for VA home and small business loan cases:  An attorney or agent may 
charge you a reasonable fee for services involving a VA home loan or small 
business loan.  For more information, read section 5904, title 38, United 
States Code. 

In all cases, a copy of any fee agreement between you and an attorney or 
accredited agent must be sent to: 

Office of the Senior Deputy Vice Chairman (012)
Board of Veterans' Appeals
810 Vermont Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20420

The Board may decide, on its own, to review a fee agreement for 
reasonableness, or you or your attorney or agent can file a motion asking 
the Board to do so. Send such a motion to the address above for the Office 
of the Senior Deputy Vice Chairman at the Board. 


VA 
FORM
JUN 
2003 
(RS) 
 
4597
Page 
2



