Citation Nr: 0918094	
Decision Date: 05/14/09    Archive Date: 05/21/09

DOCKET NO.  06-19 883	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in 
Indianapolis, Indiana


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for an anxiety disorder, 
claimed as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Veteran represented by:	Disabled American Veterans


WITNESSES AT HEARING ON APPEAL

The Veteran and his son


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

M. Donohue, Associate Counsel 

INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty in the United States Army 
from February 1947 to January 1947 and from September 1950 to 
October 1951.  

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals 
(Board) on appeal of a June 2005 rating decision by the 
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in 
Indianapolis, Indiana, which denied service connection for 
PTSD. The Veteran requested de novo review by a Decision 
Review Officer (DRO).  
The DRO issued a statement of the case (SOC) in May 2006 that 
continued the denial of his claim.  The Veteran's appeal was 
perfected with the timely submission of his substantive 
appeal (VA Form 9) in June 2006.

The Veteran testified at a Travel Board hearing which was 
chaired by the undersigned Veterans Law Judge at the 
Indianapolis RO in April 2009.  A transcript of the hearing 
has been associated with the Veteran's VA claims folder.

At the Travel Board hearing, the Veteran's representative 
made a motion to advance this case on the Board's docket, 
which was granted.  See 38 U.S.C.A. § 7107 (West 2002); 38 
C.F.R. § 20.900 (2008).

Clarification of issue on appeal

The Veteran originally filed a claim of entitlement to 
service connection for PTSD.  As is discussed in more detail 
below, the medical evidence of record indicates that the 
Veteran has been diagnosed with an anxiety disorder and 
depression; he has not been diagnosed with PTSD.  Although 
not claimed by the Veteran, the Board is expanding his 
original claim to include all anxiety disorders.  See Clemons 
v. Shinseki, No. 07-0558 (U.S. Vet. App., Feb. 19, 2009) [a 
claimant without medical expertise cannot be expected to 
precisely delineate the diagnosis of his mental illness; he 
filed a claim for the affliction his mental condition, 
whatever it is, causes him].  

In Bernard v. Brown, 4 Vet. App. 384 (1993), the United 
States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (the Court) held 
that before the Board may address a matter that has not been 
addressed by the RO, it must consider whether the claimant 
has been given adequate notice of the need to submit evidence 
or argument, an opportunity to submit such evidence or 
argument, and an opportunity to address the question at a 
hearing, and whether the claimant has been prejudiced by any 
denials of those opportunities.  Although the RO, which was 
obviously without the benefit of Clemons, denominated the 
claim as one for PTSD, the Board finds that the Veteran was 
not prejudiced thereby.  As will be discussed below, the RO 
obtained all available medical records, which included 
diagnoses of other anxiety disorders rather than PTSD.  The 
RO, in a letter dated March 22, 2005, asked for evidence of 
"a relationship between your current disability and an 
injury, disease, or event in military service."  The Veteran 
presented testimony as to the relationship between his 
military service and his current mental disability at the 
Travel Board hearing in April 2009. 


FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  A preponderance of the competent medical evidence of 
record does not indicate that the Veteran has PTSD. 

2.  The evidence of record does not support a finding that a 
relationship exists between the Veteran's currently diagnosed 
anxiety disorder and his military service.


CONCLUSION OF LAW

An anxiety disorder was not incurred in or aggravated by 
military service. 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1131, 1110 (West 2002); 38 
C.F.R. §§ 3.303 (2008).




REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The Veteran seeks entitlement to service connection for an 
anxiety disorder, claimed as PTSD. 

In the interest of clarity, the Board will first discuss 
certain preliminary matters.  The Board will then render a 
decision. 

The Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA)

The Board has given consideration to the VCAA.  The VCAA 
includes an enhanced duty on the part of VA to notify a 
claimant as to the information and evidence necessary to 
substantiate claims for VA benefits.  The VCAA also redefines 
the obligations of VA with respect to its statutory duty to 
assist claimants in the development of their claims.  See 
38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5103, 5103A (West 2002).  

The VCAA alters the legal landscape in three distinct ways: 
standard of review, notice and duty to assist.  The Board 
will now address these concepts within the context of the 
circumstances presented in this case.

Standard of review

After the evidence has been assembled, it is the Board's 
responsibility to evaluate the entire record.  See 38 
U.S.C.A. § 7104(a) (West 2002).  When there is an approximate 
balance of evidence regarding the merits of an issue material 
to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt 
in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.  
See 38 U.S.C.A. § 5107 (West 2002); 38 C.F.R. § 3.102 
(2008).  

In Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49, 53 (1990), the Court 
stated that "a veteran need only demonstrate that there is 
an 'approximate balance of positive and negative evidence' in 
order to prevail."  To deny a claim on its merits, the 
preponderance of the evidence must be against the claim.  See 
Alemany v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 518, 519 (1996), citing 
Gilbert, 1 Vet. App. at 54.

Notice

The VCAA requires VA to notify the claimant and the 
claimant's representative, if any, of any information and any 
medical or lay evidence not previously provided to VA that is 
necessary to substantiate the claim.  As part of the notice, 
VA is to specifically inform the claimant and the claimant's 
representative, if any, of which portion, if any, of the 
evidence is to be provided by the claimant and which part, if 
any, VA will attempt to obtain on behalf of the claimant. 
 See 38 U.S.C.A. § 5103 (West 2002); see also Quartuccio v. 
Principi, 16 Vet. App. 183 (2002) [a letter from VA to an 
appellant describing evidence potentially helpful to the 
appellant but not mentioning who is responsible for obtaining 
such evidence did not meet the standard erected by the VCAA].

After having carefully reviewed the record, the Board has 
concluded that the notice requirements of the VCAA have been 
satisfied with respect to the issue on appeal.  The Board 
observes that the Veteran was informed of the evidentiary 
requirements for service connection in a letter from the RO 
dated March 22, 2005, including a request for evidence of "a 
relationship between your current disability and an injury, 
disease, or event in military service."     

Crucially, the RO informed the Veteran of VA's duty to assist 
him in the development of his claim in the above-referenced 
March 2005 letter, whereby the Veteran was advised of the 
provisions relating to the VCAA.  Specifically, the Veteran 
was advised that VA would assist him with obtaining 
"relevant records from any Federal agency.  This may include 
medical records from the military, from VA Medical Centers 
(including private facilities where VA authorized treatment), 
or from the Social Security Administration."  With respect 
to private treatment records, the letter informed the Veteran 
that the VA would make reasonable efforts to obtain private 
or non-Federal medical records to include "records from 
State or local governments, private doctors and hospitals, or 
current or former employers."  Furthermore, the VA included 
copies of VA Form 21-4142, Authorization and Consent to 
Release Information, which the Veteran could complete to 
release private medical records to the VA.  

The March 2005 letter further emphasized:  "If [there is] 
evidence [that] is not in your possession, you must give us 
enough information about the evidence so that we can request 
it from the person or agency that has it.  If the holder of 
the evidence declines to give it to us, asks for a fee to 
provide it, or VA otherwise cannot get the evidence, we will 
notify you.  It is your responsibility to make sure we 
receive all requested records that are not in the possession 
of a Federal department or agency." [Emphasis as in the 
original letter]

The Board notes that the March 2005 letter specifically 
requested of the Veteran: "If there is any other evidence or 
information that you think will support your claim, please 
let us know.  If you have any evidence in your possession 
that pertains to your claim, please send it to us."  This 
informed the Veteran that he could submit or identify 
evidence other than what was specifically requested by the 
RO.  This complies with the "give us everything you've got" 
provision formerly contained in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(b) in that 
it informed the Veteran that he could submit or identify 
evidence other than what was specifically requested by the 
RO.  [The Board observes that 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 was recently 
revised, effective as of May 30, 2008.  See 73 Fed. Reg. 
23,353-23,356 (April 30, 2008).  The final rule removes the 
third sentence of 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(b)(1), which had stated 
that VA will request the claimant to provide any evidence in 
the claimant's possession that pertains to the claim.]  

In Dingess v. Nicholson, 19 Vet. App. 473 (2006), the Court 
observed that a claim of entitlement to service connection 
consists of five elements:  (1) veteran status; (2) existence 
of a disability; (3) a connection between the veteran's 
service and the disability; (4) degree of disability; and (5) 
effective date.  Because a service connection claim is 
comprised of five elements, the Court further held that the 
notice requirements of section 5103(a) apply generally to all 
five elements of that claim.  Therefore, upon receipt of an 
application for a service connection claim, section 5103(a) 
and section 3.159(b) require VA to review the information and 
the evidence presented with the claim and to provide the 
claimant with notice of what information and evidence not 
previously provided, if any, will assist in substantiating or 
is necessary to substantiate the elements of the claim as 
reasonably contemplated by the application.  This includes 
notice that a disability rating and an effective date for the 
award of benefits will be assigned if service connection is 
awarded.

The Veteran was provided specific notice of the Dingess 
decision in a March 20, 2006 letter which detailed the 
evidence considered in determining a disability rating, 
including "nature and symptoms of the condition; severity 
and duration of the symptoms; and impact of the condition and 
symptoms on employment."  The Veteran was also advised in 
the letter as to examples of evidence that would be pertinent 
to a disability rating, such as on-going treatment records, 
recent Social Security determinations and statements from 
employers as to job performance and time lost due to service-
connected disabilities.  

With respect to effective date, the March 2006 letter 
instructed the Veteran that two factors were relevant in 
determining effective dates of increased rating claims: when 
the claim was received; and when the evidence "shows a level 
of disability that supports a certain rating under the rating 
schedule or other applicable standards."  The Veteran was 
also advised in the letter as to examples of evidence that 
would be pertinent to an effective date determination, such 
as information about continuous treatment or when treatment 
began, service medical records the Veteran may not have 
submitted and reports of treatment while attending training 
in the Guard or Reserve. 

In short, the record indicates that the Veteran received 
appropriate notice pursuant to the VCAA.

Duty to assist

In general, the VCAA provides that VA shall make reasonable 
efforts to assist a claimant in obtaining evidence necessary 
to substantiate a claim for VA benefits, unless no reasonable 
possibility exists that such assistance would aid in 
substantiating the claim.  See 38 U.S.C.A. § 5103A (West 
2002); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (2008).

The Board finds that reasonable efforts have been made to 
assist the Veteran in obtaining evidence necessary to 
substantiate his claim, and that there is no reasonable 
possibility that further assistance would aid in 
substantiating it.  In particular, the VA has obtained the 
Veteran's service treatment records and VA outpatient 
treatment records.  
 
The Veteran's service personnel records have not been 
associated with his VA claims folder, and the National 
Personnel Records Center (NPRC) indicated that these records 
were destroyed in a fire at the facility in 1973.  The Board 
is cognizant of Hayre v. West, 188 F.3d 1327 (Fed. Cir. 
1999), wherein the United States Court of Appeals for the 
Federal Circuit elaborated on the VA's responsibility to 
obtain a veteran's service records.  The Board finds, 
however, that in light of evidence that the records were 
destroyed in a fire there is no reasonable possibility that 
the missing records may be located or recovered, and thus no 
useful purpose would be served in remanding this matter for 
more development.   

In this connection, the Board observes that where records are 
unavailable "VA has no duty to seek to obtain that which 
does not exist."  See Counts v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 473, 477 
(1994); Porter v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 233, 237 (1993).  See 
also Hayre, supra [VA's efforts to obtain service department 
records shall continue until the records are obtained or 
unless it is reasonably certain that such records do not 
exist or that further efforts to obtain those records would 
be futile].  So it is in this case.

The Board also observes that the Veteran has not been 
accorded a VA compensation and pension examination with 
regard to his claim, and that a medical opinion regarding the 
etiology of the claimed disability has not been obtained.  
The law provides that the assistance provided by VA shall 
include providing a medical examination or obtaining a 
medical opinion when such an examination or opinion is 
necessary to make a decision on the claim.  An examination is 
deemed "necessary" if the record does not contain 
sufficient medical evidence for VA to make a decision on the 
claim.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.139 (2008).  For reasons explained 
immediately below, such an examination and medical opinion 
are not necessary.

Under McLendon v. Nicholson, 20 Vet. App. 79 (2006), in 
initial service connection claims, the VA must provide a VA 
medical examination when there is (1) competent evidence of a 
current disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a 
disability; (2) evidence establishing that an event, injury, 
or disease occurred in service; (3) an indication that the 
disability or persistent or recurrent symptoms of a 
disability may be associated with the veteran's service; and 
(4) insufficient competent medical evidence on file for VA to 
make a decision on the claim.

As will be discussed below, there is already medical evidence 
that the Veteran currently has an anxiety disorder and 
depression.  The record is missing critical evidence of that 
an event, injury, or disease occurred in service, McLendon 
element (2), and the Veteran's claim is being denied on that 
basis.  The outcome of this case thus hinges on matters other 
than those which are amenable to VA examination and medical 
opinion. Specifically, resolutions of the claim of 
entitlement to service connection hinge directly or 
indirectly upon whether the Veteran was the victim suffered 
an in-service injury or disease.  That question cannot be 
answered via medical examination or opinion, but rather on 
evidence already in the file, in particular the Veteran's 
service medical records.

As explained in greater detail below, the outcome of the 
claim of service connection hinges on what occurred, or more 
precisely what did not occur, during service.  
In the absence of evidence of in-service disease, referral of 
this case for an opinion as to etiology would in essence 
place the examining physician in the role of a fact finder. 
 This is the Board's responsibility.  In other words, any 
medical opinion which provided a nexus between the Veteran's 
claimed disability and his military service would necessarily 
be based solely on his uncorroborated assertions regarding 
what occurred in service.  The Court has held on a number of 
occasions that a medical opinion premised upon an 
unsubstantiated account of a claimant is of no probative 
value.  See, e.g., Swann v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 229, 233 
(1993) [generally observing that a medical opinion premised 
upon an unsubstantiated account is of no probative value, and 
does not serve to verify the occurrences described]; Reonal 
v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 458, 461 (1993) [the Board is not bound 
to accept a physician's opinion when it is based exclusively 
on the recitations of a claimant]. 

The facts of this case are different than the facts in 
Charles v. Principi, 16 Vet. App. 370 (2002), in which the 
Court held that VA erred in failing to obtain a medical nexus 
opinion where evidence showed acoustic trauma in service and 
a current diagnosis of tinnitus. Significantly, in this case 
there is no objective evidence of in-service disease or 
injury.

Under the circumstances presented in this case, a remand 
ordering a medical examination would serve no useful purpose. 
Accordingly, the Board has determined that a medical opinion 
is not necessary in the instant case.

The Board additionally observes that all appropriate due 
process concerns have been satisfied.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.103 
(2008).  The Veteran has been accorded the opportunity to 
present evidence and argument in support of his claim.  
He exercised the option of a personal hearing and was 
afforded one in April 2009 as detailed in the Introduction. 

Accordingly, the Board will proceed to a decision.  

Relevant law and regulations 

Service connection - in general

In general, service connection may be granted for disability 
or injury incurred in or aggravated by active military 
service.  38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 1131 (West 2002); 
38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (2008).  

In order to establish service connection for the claimed 
disorder, there must be (1) medical evidence of a current 
disability; (2) medical, or in certain circumstances, lay 
evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease 
or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the 
claimed in-service disease or injury and the current 
disability.  See Hickson v. West, 12 Vet. App. 247, 253 
(1999).  The determination as to whether these requirements 
are met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record 
and the evaluation of its credibility and probative value.  
See Baldwin v. West, 13 Vet. App. 1, 8 (1999).

Service connection presupposes a current diagnosis of the 
claimed disability.  See Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 
223, 225 (1992).  The Court has held that the "current 
disability" requirement is satisfied "when a claimant has a 
disability at the time a claim for VA disability compensation 
is filed or during the pendency of that claim . . . even 
though the disability resolves prior to the Secretary's 
adjudication of the claim."  See McClain v. Nicholson, 
21 Vet. App. 319 (2007).

Specific criteria to establish service connection for PTSD

According to VA regulations, entitlement to service  
connection for PTSD requires that three elements be present:  
(1) medical evidence diagnosing PTSD; (2) combat status or 
credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service 
stressors actually occurred; and (3) a link, established by  
medical evidence, between current symptomatology and the 
claimed in service stressors.  See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) 
(2008); see also Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997).

Analysis

PTSD

As noted above, service connection for PTSD requires that 
three elements be met: (1) medical evidence diagnosing PTSD; 
(2) combat status or credible supporting evidence that the 
claimed in-service stressors actually occurred; and (3) a 
link, established by medical evidence, between current 
symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressors.  See 38 
C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (2008).

With respect to the first element, a current medical 
diagnosis of PTSD, the evidence of record contains several 
diagnostic reports and numerous VA out-patient records that 
focus on the Veteran's mental illness. The Veteran has been 
diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder and depression.  
The medical evidence of record does not include a diagnosis 
of PTSD.  Moreover, multiple VA outpatient treatment records 
specifically rule out PTSD as a diagnosis.  See, e.g., 
a February 2009 VA individual psychotherapy treatment note.
 
A February 2004 Vet Center treatment record documented "PTSD 
type" symptoms.  This record not provide a diagnosis.  See 
Sanchez-Benitez v. West, 13 Vet. App. 282 (1999) [symptoms 
alone, without a diagnosed or identifiable underlying malady 
or condition, do not in and of themselves constitute a 
disability for which service connection may be granted].  

The Veteran has been accorded ample opportunity to present 
medical evidence in support of his claim; he has failed to do 
so.  See 38 U.S.C.A. § 5107(a) [it is the claimant's 
responsibility to support a claim for VA benefits].  

To the extent that the Veteran himself believes that he has 
PTSD, it is now well established that lay persons without 
medical training, such as the Veteran, are not competent to 
comment on medical matters such as diagnosis, date of onset 
or cause of a disability.  See Espiritu v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. 
App. 491, 494-5 (1992) see also 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (a)(1) 
[competent medical evidence means evidence provided by a 
person who is qualified through education, training, or 
experience to offer medical diagnoses, statements, or 
opinions].  The statements offered in support of the 
Veteran's claim by him are not competent medical evidence and 
do not serve to establish the existence of a current 
disability.  

In the absence of a diagnosis, service connection for PTSD 
may not be granted.  
See Degmetich v. Brown, 104 F.3d 1328 (Fed. Cir. 1997); 
Gilpin v. Brown, 155 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1998) [service 
connection cannot be granted if the claimed disability does 
not exist].  Accordingly, 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) element (1) 
has not been met and the Veteran's PTSD claim fails on this 
basis alone.




Anxiety disorder other than PTSD 

As noted above, in order for service connection to be 
granted, three elements must be present: (1) a current 
disability; (2) in-service incurrence of disease or injury; 
and (3) medical nexus.  See Hickson, supra.

With respect to Hickson element (1), current disability, the 
medical evidence indicates that the Veteran has been 
diagnosed with a generalized anxiety disorder and depression.  
Hickson element (1) has therefore been demonstrated. 

With respect to Hickson element (2), the Veteran's service 
treatment records are negative as to any suggestion of an 
anxiety disorder or any other psychiatric problem during 
service.  The Veteran's January 1947 separation examination 
revealed that no psychiatric disabilities were present; and 
the service treatment records for the Veteran's second period 
of service, which ended in October 1951, do not describe any 
psychiatric complaints or disabilities.  

In fact, the first evidence of an anxiety disorder comes more 
than 50 years after the Veteran left military service, in 
January 2004, when the Veteran appeared for a VA outpatient 
group counseling on his own initiative.  There are no in-
service or post service medical records indicating that the 
Veteran developed an anxiety disorder during service.  
Accordingly, Hickson element (2) has not been met, and the 
Veteran's claim fails on this basis alone. 

In the absence of element (2), it follows that element (3), 
medical nexus, is necessarily lacking.  Indeed, the evidence 
of record does not include any medical statements attempting 
to link the Veteran's currently diagnosed generalized anxiety 
disorder or depression to his military service over a half 
century earlier.  

The Veteran has contended that stressful events in military 
service led to his currently diagnosed anxiety disorder.  He 
has presented no medical evidence in support of that 
contention.  To the extent that the Veteran contends that a 
medical relationship exists between his currently diagnosed 
anxiety disorder and depression and his military service, any 
such statements offered in support of the Veteran's claim do 
not constitute competent medical evidence and cannot be 
accepted by the Board.  See Espiritu, supra.

The Board is of course aware of the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 
3.303(b), discussed above, relating to chronicity and 
continuity of symptomatology.  However, as noted above, the 
medical evidence indicates that the Veteran's was noted to 
have depression symptoms in January 2004.  He was first 
diagnosed with depression and generalized anxiety disorder in 
February 2009, more than 50 years after he left military 
service.  See Maxon v. Gober, 230 F.3d 1330, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 
2000) [noting that it was proper to consider the Veteran's 
entire medical history, including the lengthy period of 
absence of complaint with respect to the condition he now 
raised]; see also Voerth v. West, 13 Vet. App. 117, 120-21 
(1999) [there must be medical evidence on file demonstrating 
a relationship between the Veteran's current disability and 
the claimed continuous symptomatology, unless such a 
relationship is one as to which a lay person's observation is 
competent].  Such evidence is lacking in this case.  
Continuity of symptomatology after service has therefore not 
been demonstrated.  

Accordingly, Hickson element (3), medical nexus, has not been 
satisfied, and the claim fails on that basis as well.  


ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for an anxiety disorder is 
denied.



____________________________________________
Barry F. Bohan
Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' Appeals




 Department of Veterans Affairs


