Citation Nr: 1631914	
Decision Date: 08/11/16    Archive Date: 08/23/16

DOCKET NO.  09-27 855A	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO)
in Reno, Nevada


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Vietnam Veterans of America


WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

L. Leifert, Associate Counsel


INTRODUCTION

The Veteran served on active duty in the Army from February 1968 to April 1970. 

This appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) arose from a December 2007 rating decision in which the RO, inter alia, denied service connection for PTSD.  The Veteran filed a notice of disagreement (NOD) in November 2008.  In July 2009, the RO issued a statement of the case (SOC), and the Veteran filed a substantive appeal (via a VA Form 9, Appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals ) in August 2009.

In May 2016, the Veteran testified during a Board hearing before the undersigned Veterans Law Judge (VLJ) at the Las Vegas satellite office of the Reno RO; a transcript of that hearing is of record.

With respect to characterization of the claim on appeal, the Board notes that, while the Veteran's claim has only been adjudicated as one for service connection for PTSD, given the various diagnoses of acquired psychiatric disorders of record, including PTSD and depression, not otherwise specified (NOS), the issue has been expanded and re-characterized, as reflected on the title page,.  See Clemons v. Shinseki, 23 Vet. App. 1 (2009) (the scope of a mental health disability claim includes any mental disability that may reasonably be encompassed by the claimant's description of the claim, reported symptoms, and the other information of record).

This appeal is now being processed utilizing the paperless, electronic Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) and Virtual VA claims processing systems. 

For reasons expressed below, the matter on appeal is being remanded to the agency of original jurisdiction (AOJ). VA will notify the Veteran when further action, on his part, is required.


REMAND

The Board's review of the claims file reveals that further AOJ action in this appeal is warranted.  Specifically, there appear to be pertinent medical records outstanding.

During his May 2016 Board hearing,  the Veteran testified that he has been attending two different group therapy sessions, one every other Tuesday in Kingsman, Arizona, and another in Las Vegas.  He is seen by his social worker M.A. and Dr. B.  The claims file currently includes VA treatment records from the Prescott VA Medical Center (VAMC), dated from June 2000 through March 2014; and from the Las Vegas VAMC dated from March 2011 through April 2016.  Thus, outstanding mental health records-to  include Prescott VAMC records dated since March 2014 , and Las Vegas VAMC records dated since April 2016-likely exist.  The Board emphasizes that records generated by VA facilities that may have an impact on the adjudication of a claim are considered constructively in the possession of VA adjudicators during the consideration of a claim, regardless of whether those records are physically on file.  See Dunn v. West, 11 Vet. App. 462 (1998); Bell v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 611 (1992).  Hence, the AOJ should obtain  all outstanding, pertinent records of mental evaluation and/or treatment of the Veteran, following the procedures prescribed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) as regards requests for records from Federal facilities.

The AOJ should also give the Veteran another opportunity to provide additional information and/or evidence pertinent to the claim on appeal ,explaining that he has a full one-year period to respond.  See 38 U.S.C.A. § 5103(b)(1) (West 2014); but see also 38 U.S.C.A. § 5103(b)(3) (clarifying that VA may make a decision on a claim before the expiration of the one-year notice period).  In its letter, the AOJ should specifically request that the Veteran provide, or provide appropriate authorization to obtain, any outstanding, pertinent private (non-VA) records. 

Thereafter, the AOJ should obtain any additional evidence for which the Veteran provides sufficient information and, if necessary, authorization, following the procedures prescribed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (2015).

The actions identified herein are consistent with the duties imposed by the Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA). See 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5103, 5103A (West 2014); 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (2015).  However, identification of specific actions requested on remand does not relieve the AOJ of the responsibility to ensure full VCAA compliance.  Hence, in addition to the actions requested above, the AOJ should also undertake any other development or notification action deemed warranted (to include arranging for further examination of the Veteran, or obtaining further medical opinion, if appropriate) prior to adjudicating the claim on appeal.  

Accordingly, this matter is hereby REMANDED for the following action:

1.  Obtain all outstanding records of VA mental health evaluation and/or treatment of the Veteran-to include records from the Prescott and Las Vegas VAMCs (and any associated facility(ies)) dated since March 2014 and April 2016, respectively.  Follow the procedures of 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (2015) as regards requesting records from Federal facilities.  All records and/or responses should be associated with the claims file. 
 
2.  Send to the Veteran and his representative a letter requesting that the Veteran provide sufficient information, and if necessary, authorization to obtain any additional evidence pertinent to the claims on appeal that is not currently of record.  Specifically request that the Veteran furnish, or furnish appropriate authorization to obtain, all outstanding, pertinent private (non-VA) records.

Clearly explain to the Veteran that he has a full one-year period to respond (although VA may decide the claim within the one-year period).
 
3.  If the Veteran responds, assist him in obtaining any additional evidence identified, following the current procedures set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.  All records/responses received should be associated with the claims file.  If any records sought are not obtained, notify the Veteran of the records that were not obtained, explain the efforts taken to obtain them, and describe further action to be taken.
 
4.  To help avoid future remand, ensure that all requested actions have been accomplished (to the extent possible) in compliance with this REMAND.  If any action is not undertaken, or is taken in a deficient manner, appropriate corrective action should be undertaken.  Stegall v. West, 11 Vet. App. 268 (1998).

5.  After completing the requested actions, and any additional notification and/or development deemed warranted (to include arranging for further medical examination of the Veteran or obtaining further medical opinion, if appropriate), adjudicate the claim on appeal in light of all pertinent evidence (to include all evidence added to the VBMS and/or Virtual VA file(s) since the last adjudication) and legal authority.
 
6.   If the benefit sought on appeal remains denied, furnish the Veteran and his representative an appropriate supplemental SOC that includes clear reasons and bases for all determinations, and afford them the appropriate time period for response.

The purpose of this REMAND is to afford due process and to accomplish additional development and adjudication; it is not the Board's intent to imply whether the benefits requested should be granted or denied.  The Veteran need take no action until otherwise notified, but he may furnish additional evidence and/or argument during the appropriate time frame.  See Kutscherousky v. West, 12 Vet. App. 369 (1999).

This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment.  The law requires that all claims remanded by the Board of Veterans' Appeals  or by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims for additional development or other appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.  See 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5109B, 7112 (West 2014).



_________________________________________________
JACQUELINE E. MONROE
Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' Appeals

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 2014), only a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.  This remand is in the nature of a preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the Board on the merits of the appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) (2015).

