BVA9414262
DOCKET NO.  92-20 997     )       DATE
          )
          )

On appeal from a decision of the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in St. Petersburg,
Florida

THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD).

REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by: Disabled American Veterans

ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

Keith W. Allen,  Associate Counsel

INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from September 1964 to
September 1968.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on
appeal from a March 1992 decision of the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in St. Petersburg, Florida,
which denied the veteran's claim for service connection for PTSD.

In a March 1993 statement, the veteran's representative made a
claim that there was clear and unmistakable error in a 1975
rating decision of the RO which severed service connection for an
anxiety neurosis which, in 1972, had been granted as being
secondary to service-connected shell fragment wound residuals.
The claim of clear and unmistakable error in the 1975 severance
action has not been adjudicated by the RO; it is not properly
before the Board at this time; and it is referred to the RO for
appropriate action.

REMAND

The veteran's claim for service connection for PTSD is well
grounded, meaning not inherently implausible, and the file
indicates there is a further VA duty to assist him in developing
facts pertinent to that claim.  38 U.S.C.A. § 5107(a) (West
1991); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a), 3.159 (1993).

The RO has not had the opportunity to apply a recently enacted
regulation concerning claims for service connection for PTSD.
That regulation, 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f), provides that service
connection for PTSD requires medical evidence of a clear
diagnosis of the condition, credible supporting evidence that the
claimed in-service stressor actually occurred, and a link,
established by medical evidence, between current symptomatology
and the claimed in-service stressor.

With regard to the validity of a stressor, if it is not related
to combat with the enemy, it must be corroborated by service
medical records or other credible supporting evidence.  Zarycki
v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 91 (1993); Doran v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 283
(1994).  Although the veteran apparently alleges combat service,
and told stories of combat to the psychiatrist at the VA
compensation examination in January 1992, there is no probative
evidence of combat participation.  The veteran served on active
duty in the Air Force, and his overseas service during the
Vietnam War was at an air base in Thailand, performing duties of
an air traffic controller.  Service records show no medals or
other information suggesting combat service.  Of course, a valid
stressor for PTSD does not have to involve combat.  The veteran's
service records document a potential non-combat stressor; gunshot
wounds sustained while riding his motorcycle on authorized
liberty in Thailand (residuals of the wounds are service-
connected).  Medical evidence of linkage between this event and
any clearly diagnosed PTSD would be required for service
connection.

Medical records since service, including recent ones, primarily
show psychiatric diagnoses other than PTSD.  The January 1992 VA
compensation examination led to diagnoses of schizophrenia and
PTSD, but there is some question as to whether the examiner
considered all diagnostic criteria for PTSD as set forth in DSM-
III-R (See 38 C.F.R. § 4.126), and the examination shows no clear
assessment of medical causation between verified service
stressors and purported PTSD.  While some recent outpatient
records briefly refer to PTSD (in addition to schizophrenia),
there are many recent inpatient and outpatient records which only
show schizophrenia and give no indication of PTSD.  See, e.g.,
November 1992 report of VA psychological testing, and summary of
November-December 1992 VA hospitalization.

In my judgment, a special VA psychiatric examination, by a board
of two psychiatrist, is warranted on the question of whether PTSD
exists and whether it is linked to a service stressor.

The examination should review all historical records.  The file
indicates that additional relevant records may exist, and these
should first be obtained.  Murincsak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet.App. 363
(1992).  In this regard, correspondence on file indicates that
the veteran receives ongoing VA psychiatric treatment; he has
apparently filed for Social Security disability benefits; and
there is information that he may be receiving disability
retirement benefits from a Federal Civil Service job (air traffic
controller with the Federal Aviation Administration) due to a
mental disorder.

In view of the foregoing, the case is REMANDED for the following
action:

1.  The RO should ask the veteran to
identify all sources of psychiatric
treatment or examination since service.
Names and addresses of medical providers,
and dates of services should be listed.
The RO should obtain copies of all relevant
medical records identified by the veteran,
including ongoing VA treatment records
dated after the ones currently on file.

2.  The RO should contact the U.S. Office
of Personnel Management (or other
appropriate office) and obtain copies of
all medical records and decisions related
to any award of Federal Civil Service
disability retirement benefits.  The RO
should also contact the Social Security
Administration and obtain copies of medical
records and decisions related to an
application for disability benefits from
that agency.

3.  After the foregoing is accomplished and
the records added to the claims folder, the
veteran should undergo a VA psychiatric
examination by a board of two
psychiatrists.  The claims folder must be
made available to, and its contents
reviewed by, the doctors.  Psychological
testing should be provided.  The examiners
should note all psychiatric conditions, and
should specifically diagnose or rule out
PTSD in accordance to the diagnostic
criteria of DSM-III-R; the doctors should
specify the purported stressor(s) felt to
be medically linked to any PTSD which is
found.

4.  Thereafter, the RO should review the
claim for service connection for PTSD, and
this should include consideration of 38
C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

If the claim is denied, the veteran and his representative should
be issued a supplemental statement of the case and given an
opportunity to respond.  Then the case should be returned to the
Board.

          L. W. TOBIN
          Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

The Board of Veterans' Appeals Administrative Procedures
Improvement Act, Pub. L. No. 103-271, § 6, 108 Stat. 740, ___
(1994), permits a proceeding instituted before the Board to be
assigned to an individual member of the Board for a
determination.  This proceeding has been assigned to an
individual member of the Board.

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the Board
on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) (1993).

