Decision Date: 10/12/95				Archive Date: 
10/12/95 
DOCKET NO.  93-22 779	)	DATE 
	) 
	) 
 
On appeal from the decision of the  
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in 
Manchester, New Hampshire 
 
 
THE ISSUE 
 
Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD). 
 
 
REPRESENTATION 
Appellant represented by:	Disabled American Veterans 
 
 
WITNESSES AT HEARING ON APPEAL 
 
Appellant and his wife 
 
 
ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD 
 
P. Gutstein, Counsel 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The veteran served on active duty from August 1964 to August 
1968, and from June 1971 to December 1977.  He filed an 
appeal from the October 1992 rating decision of the 
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Manchester, New 
Hampshire, Regional Office (RO), which denied service 
connection for PTSD.  The veteran filed a notice of 
disagreement in December 1992, and he was furnished a 
statement of the case in April 1993.  He filed a substantive 
appeal in May 1993.  He and his wife were afforded a hearing 
at the RO before a traveling member of the Board in 
September 1993.  The case was remanded by letter in April 
1994.  The veteran is represented in his appeal by the 
Disabled American Veterans, which has submitted written 
argument in his behalf. 
 
At the veteran's personal hearing, it was stated that he 
wished to file a notice of disagreement from the rating 
decision of November 1992 in which 10 percent ratings were 
continued for service-connected chronic strain of the 
cervical and dorsal spine and for chronic low back strain 
with osteoarthritis. It was also reported that the veteran 
wished to file a claim for service connection for a 
gastrointestinal disorder.  The case was sent back to the RO 
in April 1994 for the purpose of dealing with those issues.  
However, a subsequent letter from the veteran that month 
requested that his case be returned to the Board for the 
purpose of having the issue of service connection for PTSD 
completed.  Accordingly, the other issues, which are not in 
appellate status, are referred to the attention of the RO 
for appropriate action. 
 
 
CONTENTIONS OF APPELLANT ON APPEAL 
 
It is argued that the veteran developed PTSD while stationed 
in Vietnam when his base was attacked by the enemy,and 
personnel at the base were killed, with this experience 
representing life-threatening stressors.  As a result, it is 
further argued that the veteran was diagnosed after service 
as having PTSD, resulting in recurrent nightmares, anxiety, 
gastrointestinal reactions, and difficulty in concentrating 
at his work. 
DECISION OF THE BOARD 
 
The Board, in accordance with the provisions of 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 7104 (West 1991), has reviewed and considered all of the 
evidence and material of record in the veteran's claims 
file.  Based on its review of the evidence in this matter, 
and for the following reasons and bases, it is the decision 
of the Board that service connection for PTSD is warranted. 
 
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
1.  The veteran served in Vietnam at an air base in which 
stressful events, including enemy attacks with resulting 
loss of life, occurred. 
 
2.  Early in December 1966, his base was under siege from 
small arms fire and mortars followed by infiltration at the 
work site by the enemy throwing satchel charges, while the 
veteran was without a weapon to defend himself. 
 
3.  The veteran's feeling of helplessness when under enemy 
attack in Vietnam because his MOS was not allowed to carry 
weapons was considered a legitimate stressor which served as 
a basis for a PTSD diagnosis by a VA examiner in November 
1992.   
 
4.  The veteran has been medically treated for PTSD with 
symptoms of anxiety and depression, requiring constant 
medication, with manifestations of nightmares and sleep 
disturbance, difficulty concentrating and other behavioral 
disorders including withdrawal from society. 
 
 
CONCLUSION OF LAW 
 
PTSD was incurred in service.  38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 5107(b) 
(West 1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(d)(f) (1994). 
 
REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION 
 
Service connection may be granted for disability resulting 
from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by wartime 
service.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1110 (West 1991).   
38 C.F.R. § 3.304(d) (1994) provides that satisfactory lay 
or other evidence that an injury or disease was incurred or 
aggravated in combat will be accepted as sufficient proof of 
service connection if the evidence is consistent with the 
circumstances, conditions or hardships of such service even 
though there is no official record of such incurrence or 
aggravation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (1994) provides that 
service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence 
establishing a clear diagnosis of the condition, credible 
supporting evidence that the claimed inservice stressor 
actually occurred and a link, established by medical 
evidence, between current symptomatology and the claimed 
inservice stressor. 
 
The evidence in this case shows that the veteran served on 
active duty from August 1964 to August 1968 during which 
time he served almost 12 months in Vietnam, and from June 
1971 to December 1977.  The records otherwise show that the 
veteran's classification was as an aircraft and jet engine 
mechanic and that he engaged in the Vietnam air offensive 
campaign from September 1966 to March 1967 stationed at Tan 
Son Nhut Airbase.  The length of his foreign service was 
from September 1966 to September 1967.  In connection with 
his claim, the veteran submitted copies of newspaper 
articles showing raids on Tan Son Nhut Air Base by the Viet 
Cong with mortars.  A report from the United States Army and 
Joint Services Environmental Support Group (ESG) dated in 
October 1992 confirms that on December 4, 1966, the above-
cited air base suffered a hostile mortar attack and as a 
result 27 airmen were injured and three were killed.  Also 
enclosed with this report were abstracts of reports 
indicating the dates of attacks on this air base during the 
veteran's Vietnam tour of duty and that during the December 
4, 1966, attack 20 aircraft were damaged. 
 
The veteran filed a claim for service connection for PTSD in 
December 1991.  Subsequent medical reports show VA 
outpatient treatment for anxiety and depression in the early 
1990's.  A VA psychiatric examination report in August 1992 
showed that the veteran had prior employment at a naval 
shipyard until 1986 and that he had difficulties with his 
co-workers and quit with no gainful employment since then.  
He reported a history of diarrhea for 25 years, 
restlessness, nervousness, inability to concentrate, 
nightmares about Vietnam, becoming easily angry, irritable, 
light sleep only and alerted by noises, overreactive, easily 
jumpy, occasionally depressed and avoidance of people.  
Objectively, he appeared tense, his speech was somewhat 
under pressure, his posture was somewhat stiff and he was 
not able to relax completely throughout the examination.  
His facial expression showed some tension and anxiety.  The 
exa.miner diagnosed moderately severe PTSD.  It was noted 
that he was intensely psychologically distressed at exposure 
to events that verbalized or resembled aspects of the 
traumatic event which was being overrun by 300 Viet Cong and 
not having weapons to defend himself; fear of being shot at 
and a feeling of helplessness.  He avoided thoughts or 
feelings associated with the trauma and avoided activities 
and situations that aroused recollections.  He had markedly 
diminished interest in significant activities.  He had lost 
interest in his hobbies of fishing and hunting.  He was 
socially isolated and felt somewhat detached.  He had a 
startle reflex and a light sleep to be "on alert."  He 
suffered from irritability or outbursts of anger and 
exaggerated startle response. 
 
On a subsequent VA psychiatric examination conducted in 
November 1992, the veteran complained of increased anxiety 
and depression since service but had considered this 
"normal" and had avoided seeking help.  He finally sought 
help at the mental hygiene clinic.  He described his most 
traumatic episode in Vietnam as being when the Viet Cong 
tunneled under the perimeter and infiltrated his base.  He 
was in a bunker and saw a number of the enemy go by.  What 
was most distressing to him of all was that he was unarmed 
because of Air Force policy that servicemen in his position 
should not carry weapons, but instead were to be protected 
by the Air Force police.  As the infiltration was occurring, 
he recalled that the enemy fired mortar rounds from within 
the compound.  He saw a number of GI's crying, and others 
drinking to calm down.  He said he was not really too scared 
until the sun came up at which time he saw the bodies of 
several enemy dead, collected during the night's activities, 
which upset him greatly.  He also described other traumatic 
events during his service in Vietnam as having to walk by 
the morgue on his way to the chow hall and seeing American 
dead piled up on the tables.  This sight made him lose his 
appetite and his weight went down from 190 to 155 pounds.  
The examiner concluded that the veteran had recollections of 
an event in Vietnam during which he legitimately appeared to 
have felt quite helpless, apparently serving as a basis for 
the PTSD diagnosis. 
 
The veteran testified at his September 1993 personal hearing 
concerning the service events in Vietnam, described above, 
and post service events including a record of current 
treatment for PTSD every two weeks.  He was taking various 
medications for his psychiatric disability and for other 
problems.  His wife also testified indicating his strange 
behavior including the fact that the veteran has had 
recurrent diarrhea, she witnessed his nightmares, reported 
he kept loaded weapons in the house including one under the 
bed, and that after an episode of nightmares, he would lock 
himself in his bedroom. 
 
Also received in September 1993 were statements in support 
of the veteran's claim including one from R. F. R., a 
"buddy" of the veteran who knew him before service and also 
knew him overseas in Vietnam.  He knew that the veteran 
worked on the flight line on the midnight shift and recalled 
on the night of December 3 and morning of December 4, 1966, 
the base was attacked with mortars, satchel charges, 
grenades and sappers which had infiltrated across the 
runway.  He saw the veteran after the attack and the veteran 
seemed a bit shaken but was mad because he did not have a 
weapon during the attack.  He showed R. F. R. the bunker he 
was in, right in the midst of where the Viet Cong were 
killed.  You could still see the blood on the cement of the 
flight line.  Another statement from L. M. H., also received 
at the same time, concerned his knowledge of the veteran's 
experiencing diarrhea and an inability to control himself 
when visiting L. M. H.'s home in May 1973.  The veteran 
explained that he got that way when he was under stress. 
 
In the United States Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) 
decision of Zarycki v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 91 (1993), the 
Court noted that it is the distressing event rather than the 
mere presence in a "combat zone" which may constitute a 
valid stressor for purposes of supporting a diagnosis of 
PTSD.  It emphasized the importance of an event during such 
service "that is outside of the range of usual experience 
and that would be markedly distressing to almost anyone," 
such as experiencing an immediate threat to one's life or 
witnessing another person being seriously injured or killed.  
In the case at hand, the veteran has described an event 
where the enemy attacked an air base where the veteran was 
stationed at night in early December 1966 with resulting 
loss of considerable life of the enemy as well as the 
wounding of American soldiers and the death of at least 
three soldiers, and damage to the air field.  In such event, 
the veteran experienced stressful events because he was 
unarmed, and apparently angry and scared that he was unable 
to defend himself, with the situation later magnified by 
viewing of both American and enemy dead in a place set aside 
for a mortuary.  The official service records have indicated 
that this was a combat zone for the period from September 
1966 to September 1967 and the veteran has indicated that he 
was otherwise subject to stressful attacks from the enemy.  
His description of the events has been confirmed by a 
"buddy" of his.  A post service diagnosis of PTSD has been 
confirmed by VA doctors and the veteran has demonstrated 
classic symptoms of this mental disease including startle 
reaction, bad dreams, irritability, anger, anxiety, 
depression, social isolation and difficulty in working with 
others.  In Doran v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 283 (1994), the 
Court, citing the Zarycki case, supra, noted that there was 
nothing in the statute or in the regulations which provided 
that corroboration of the stressors must and can only be 
found in service records. 
 
The record establishes that PTSD was incurred in service.  
38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 5107(b) (West 1991); 38 C.F.R. § 
3.304(d)(f) (1994). 
 
 
ORDER 
 
Entitlement to service connection for PTSD is granted. 
 
 
		 
	G. H. SHUFELT 
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals 
 
The Board of Veterans' Appeals Administrative Procedures 
Improvement Act, Pub. L. No. 103-271, § 6, 108 Stat. 740, 
___ (1994), permits a proceeding instituted before the Board 
to be assigned to an individual member of the Board for a 
determination.  This proceeding has been assigned to an 
individual member of the Board. 
 
NOTICE OF APPELLATE RIGHTS:  Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7266 (West 
1991), a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals granting 
less than the complete benefit, or benefits, sought on 
appeal is appealable to the United States Court of Veterans 
Appeals within 120 days from the date of mailing of notice 
of the decision, provided that a Notice of Disagreement 
concerning an issue which was before the Board was filed 
with the agency of original jurisdiction on or after 
November 18, 1988.  Veterans' Judicial Review Act, Pub. L. 
No. 100-687, § 402 (1988).  The date which appears on the 
face of this decision constitutes the date of mailing and 
the copy of this decision which you have received is your 
notice of the action taken on your appeal by the Board of 
Veterans' Appeals. 
 
- 2 -


