Citation NR: 9604633	
Decision Date: 02/27/96		Archive Date: 03/08/96
DOCKET NO.  94–12 290	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Togus, 
Maine


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post–traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	State of Maine, Bureau of 
Veterans Services 


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

Andre Allen Vitale, Associate Counsel





INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from November 1966 to 
August 1967.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) 
from a January 1993 rating decision of the Togus, Maine, 
Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA), which denied the claim of service connection for PTSD.


CONTENTIONS OF APPELLANT ON APPEAL

The veteran contends that he developed PTSD as a result of 
his military service.


DECISION OF THE BOARD

The Board, in accordance with the provisions of 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 7104 (West 1991), has reviewed and considered all of the 
evidence and material of record in the veteran's claims file.  
Based on its review of the relevant evidence in this matter, 
and for the following reasons and bases, it is the decision 
of the Board that a preponderance of the evidence is against 
the veteran’s claim for service connection for PTSD.


FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  All relevant evidence necessary for an equitable 
disposition of the veteran’s appeal has been obtained by the 
RO.

2.  The veteran has not been shown to have PTSD that has been 
linked to an adequate stressor(s) during military service.




CONCLUSION OF LAW

The veteran does not have post–traumatic stress disorder 
which was incurred in or aggravated by military service.  
38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 5107 (West 1991); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 
3.304 (1994).


REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

Factual Background

The veteran’s service medical records show that in June 1967, 
while waiting for a hardship discharge, he complained of 
problems with depression.  There was no further complaint 
throughout the remainder of his period of service.  His 
August 1967 discharge examination report includes a notation 
of “normal” for his psychiatric condition.  During his two 
months of service in Vietnam, he served as a telephone 
switchboard operator and an observer.

The veteran filed a claim for service connection in July 
1992.  The RO sent a letter in which it requested that he 
describe the circumstances, places, and dates surrounding the 
events which he believed led to the development of post–
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  No response which included 
the requested information was received from the veteran.

An October 1968 report from Chandra P. Lal, M.D., was 
submitted which includes a diagnosis of an adjustment 
reaction of early adult–life.  This report reveals that he 
had been admitted to the psychiatric service following an 
episode when he drank heavily and was involved in an 
automobile accident.

A November 1974 VA discharge summary, included a diagnosis of 
“alcohol addiction, chronic” and a statement that he had 
previously been admitted in October 1973, for alcohol 
addiction.  A March 1976 discharge summary included a 
diagnosis of adult situational reaction and alcohol 
addiction.  The veteran was evaluated as being competent and 
not psychotic.

Prison hospital records were submitted which include a 
February 1975 entry of acute anxiety; a March 1975 notation 
of combat–fatigue; several statements that he appeared tense 
and uptight; as well as a January 1987 notation that he was 
mentally exhausted and getting no sleep.

A July 1992 VA hospital report included a notation that he 
claimed that he was beset by marked, constant anger following 
his return from Vietnam and that he drinks to control his 
behavior.  It was noted that the veteran denied any combat 
related symptoms and repressed most Vietnam–related 
experiences.  He was reported as appearing mildly depressed.  
He was admitted because of alcohol abuse.  The veteran left 
the hospital after becoming upset.  He was diagnosed with 
“alcohol dependency, continuous”; “alcohol 
intoxication/withdrawal”; and a mixed personality disorder 
with antisocial and explosive features.

The veteran was readmitted at the end of July 1992.  The 
discharge summary included a diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence/withdrawal; chronic alcoholism; and probable PTSD.

In a letter dated in August 1992, the veteran’s wife stated 
that he experienced flashbacks, thinking that he was in the 
rice patties and that they were after him.  She claimed that 
he had nightmares and sometimes would cry, thinking that his 
“buddy just got killed beside him.”  Forms dated in September 
1992, were also received which the veteran’s wife, friend, 
mother, and daughter submitted as part of his claim for 
Social Security benefits.  These forms include answers to 
specific questions concerning the manner in which the veteran 
conducted himself and some of the behaviors that he 
displayed.  His mother stated that she first began to notice 
changes in his behavior, following his separation from the 
military.  His wife noted changes after he returned from 
prison.

A November 1992 VA examination report shows that the veteran 
stated that he had been involved in three patrols, while he 
was stationed in Vietnam.  The examiner reported that the 
details of combat which the veteran related were very 
sketchy.  The veteran is reported as having stated that he 
was involved in a firefight during the first patrol and that 
four men were either killed or wounded, but that he did not 
know any of the individuals involved.  He reported that 
during the second patrol, a man was wounded and later died of 
his injuries.  His third patrol was interrupted when he was 
removed from combat as a “sole–surviving son” and was placed 
on guard duty, before returning to the United States.  He 
stated that this guard duty did not involve any threat to his 
life.  He stated that he neither has memories of, nor does he 
think about Vietnam.  The examiner reported that he did not 
find any evidence of delusions or psychotic symptomatology 
and the veteran did not report experiencing hallucinations.  
The veteran was extremely irritable and had great difficulty 
controlling his anger, which the examiner reported resulted 
in the antisocial behavior that was responsible for his being 
incarcerated throughout much of his adult–life.  The veteran 
blamed his antisocial behavior and his inability to hold a 
job, on the experiences to which he was exposed during the 
military service.  He was diagnosed with “alcohol dependency, 
continuous” and a mixed personality disorder with antisocial 
and explosive features.

A November 1992 report from William E. Mills, Jr., Ph.D., 
which was conducted as part a claim for Social Security 
benefits, reveals that the veteran established himself as an 
angry, belligerent, and totally impatient individual.  He was 
reported as experiencing immense difficulty in getting along 
with people and had displayed virtually no tolerance for any 
frustration.  No stressful events from service were noted.  
The examiner related that it was difficult to sort out some 
of his symptoms and there was not a clear indication of PTSD.  
He stated that there were no clear signs of depression, 
anxiety, or any other psychotic material.  He diagnosed the 
veteran with an antisocial personality disorder and alcohol 
dependence.

Analysis

The Board finds that the veteran has presented a well–
grounded claim for service connection for post–traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD), within the meaning of 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 5107(a) (1994).  The record shows that the veteran served 
in Vietnam and evidence has been received which includes a 
notation of a probable diagnosis of PTSD.  As a result, the 
evidence currently of record presents a claim that is not 
inherently implausible.  After reviewing the remainder of the 
record, the Board finds that all of the facts that are 
relevant to the veteran’s claim have been properly developed.  
There is no indication that other records are available which 
are relevant to the current claim of service connection.  As 
a result, nothing further is required pursuant to the duty to 
assist the veteran, as mandated by 38 U.S.C.A. § 5107(a) 
(1994).

Service connection will be granted when a veteran suffers 
from a disability that is related to an occurrence of service 
origin.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1110 (West 1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 
(1994).  To service–connect post–traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) it must be shown that the veteran currently suffers 
from the disorder, and that resulted from his exposure to 
adequate stressor(s) during it military service.  38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 1110 (West 1991); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303, 3.304(f) (1994).  To 
establish the necessary linkage to an individual’s military 
service, the record must include credible evidence which 
verifies the actual occurrence of the inservice stressor(s) 
that are determined as having led to the development of PTSD.  
38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (1994).  The Board has carefully 
considered all of the evidence of record and finds that while 
PTSD was suspected, it has not currently been diagnosed as 
being present.

The reports from two separate admissions to the hospital in 
July 1992, include questions regarding the presence of PTSD.  
However, a VA psychiatric examination was subsequently 
conducted in November 1992 and the examiner noted a history 
of combat experience, but did not diagnose PTSD.  Instead, he 
diagnosed the veteran with alcohol dependence and a mixed 
personality disorder with explosive features.  The veteran 
was also referred for a psychological examination for Social 
Security disability benefits in November 1992.  No stressful 
events were described as having been reported during the 
course of this interview and the examiner stated that there 
was not a clear indication of PTSD.

The Board has carefully considered all the evidence of record 
and finds that while PTSD was suspected it has not been 
diagnosed to be present.  The VA psychiatric examination in 
November 1992 noted the veteran’s history of combat 
experiences, but did not diagnosis PTSD.  The diagnoses 
concerned alcohol dependency and a mixed personality disorder 
with explosive features.  The veteran was also referred for a 
psychological evaluation for disability benefits in November 
1992.  No stressful events were described and the examiner 
reported that there was not a clear indication of PTSD.  the 
Board concludes that the veteran is not shown to currently 
have PTSD as the result of service.

We have considered the doctrine of giving the benefit of the 
doubt to the veteran under 38 U.S.C.A. § 5107 and 38 C.F.R. 
§§ 3.102, 4.3 (1994), but do not find the evidence is of such 
approximate balance as to warrant its application.  The 
preponderance of the evidence is against the veteran’s claim.


ORDER

The veteran’s claim of service connection for post–traumatic 
stress disorder denied.


		
	STEVEN L. COHN
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

The Board of Veterans' Appeals Administrative Procedures 
Improvement Act, Pub. L. No. 103-271, § 6, 108 Stat. 740, ___ 
(1994), permits a proceeding instituted before the Board to 
be assigned to an individual member of the Board for a 
determination.  This proceeding has been assigned to an 
individual member of the Board.

NOTICE OF APPELLATE RIGHTS:  Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7266 (West 
1991), a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals granting 
less than the complete benefit, or benefits, sought on appeal 
is appealable to the United States Court of Veterans Appeals 
within 120 days from the date of mailing of notice of the 
decision, provided that a Notice of Disagreement concerning 
an issue which was before the Board was filed with the agency 
of original jurisdiction on or after November 18, 1988.  
Veterans' Judicial Review Act, Pub. L. No. 100-687, § 402 
(1988).  The date which appears on the face of this decision 
constitutes the date of mailing and the copy of this decision 
which you have received is your notice of the action taken on 
your appeal by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.

- 2 -


