Citation NR: 9607148	
Decision Date: 03/19/96		Archive Date: 03/26/96
DOCKET NO.  94-07 851	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in 
Buffalo, New York


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).  


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	New York Division of Veterans' 
Affairs


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

W. H. Wetmore, Counsel



INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from September 1968 to May 
1970.  

The Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) received this case on 
appeal from a May 1993 RO rating decision.  


CONTENTIONS OF APPELLANT ON APPEAL

The veteran contends that he has PTSD due to his combat 
experiences in Vietnam.  He claims that he has submitted 
several statements from private doctors, a clinical social 
worker and members of his therapy group which all show that 
he did experience the stressors he claims to have experienced 
while in combat.  He asserts that his account of the 
stressors is credible, that he did serve in combat and that 
PTSD has been diagnosed; therefore, service connection should 
be granted.  


DECISION OF THE BOARD

The Board, in accordance with the provisions of 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 7104 (West 1991 & Supp. 1995), has reviewed and considered 
all of the evidence and material of record in the veteran's 
claims file.  Based on its review of the relevant evidence in 
this matter, and for the following reasons and bases, it is 
the decision of the Board that the evidence supports the 
claim of service connection for PTSD.  


FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  It is reasonably probable that the veteran was in combat 
with the enemy.  

2.  The evidence of record presents a reasonable probability 
that the veteran’s current PTSD is related to his combat 
experiences in Vietnam.  




CONCLUSION OF LAW

The veteran has PTSD which was incurred in wartime service.  
38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 5107(a) (West 1991); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.102, 
3.303, 3.304 (1995).  


REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The veteran’s service medical records are negative for 
clinically documented complaints or findings of an acquired 
psychiatric disorder.  A personality disorder was diagnosed 
in service in April 1970.  The veteran’s service personnel 
records reveal that he served in Vietnam from July 1969 to 
May 1970.  His military occupational specialty was that of a 
cook.

The veteran has provided an extensive description of 
stressful events in service, which, if deemed credible would 
support a finding that he engaged in combat with the enemy.  
However, they were not considered specific enough for 
verification by the U.S. Army and Joint Services 
Environmental Support Group (ESG).  The failure to verify 
much of what the veteran reported was due, in part, to the 
fact that the Vietnam records were incomplete.  In any event 
the ESG did report that the veteran’s battalion did receive 
the Meritorious Unit Commendation and that the battalion 
provided critical combat service support in the Mekong Delta.  
The boats were subject to ambushes and mining incidents while 
traveling the Delta’s narrow canals and rivers.  Seven unit 
personnel were killed in action.  One of the companies to 
which the veteran was assigned operated landing craft for the 
movement of personnel and cargo in the Mekong Delta, and 
these vessels were equipped with machine guns and grenade 
launchers.

P. A. Lyons, a clinical social worker, reported in January 
1992 that the veteran had been initially seen in November 
1991 due to complaints of sleep disturbance and nightmares of 
Vietnam.  He felt that the veteran was probably suffering 
from PTSD.  

C. M. Livingston, M. D., reported in May 1992 that she had 
first seen the veteran in January 1992 on referral from Mr. 
Lyons, a Vietnam outreach counselor.  She opined that he had 
PTSD secondary to his “Vietnam related combat.”

At a VA social survey conducted in May 1992, the veteran 
related stressors which included being in “firefights”, 
assisting a wounded American who died in his arms, observing 
Viet Cong prisoners being pushed out of a plane, witnessing a 
burning village after a Viet Cong attack, smelling death, 
seeing charred bodies and seeing “buddies killed.”

At a VA psychiatric examination in May 1992, the examiner 
concluded that the veteran’s psychiatric symptomatology 
seemed to date back to 1970 and that it had gotten worse 
since 1991, during the period of “Desert Storm.”  The present 
symptoms were deemed consistent with PTSD, and that was the 
diagnosis.  

In May 1992, Mr. Lyons wrote that the veteran had PTSD.  That 
month, Dr. Livingston wrote that the veteran had PTSD due to 
his combat experience in Vietnam.  In June 1992, J. Alpert, 
M.D., concluded that the veteran had PTSD due to Vietnam 
combat.  

Dr. Livingston reported in October 1993 that the veteran had 
PTSD.  

In January 1994, Mr. Lyons and four others, identified as 
members of a Vietnam Veteran’s Adjustment Group therapy 
program since June 1992, signed a statement to the effect 
that they believed the veteran had PTSD due to his combat 
experiences in Vietnam.  

In summary, every health care professional on record in this 
case has diagnosed PTSD.  There is no dispute whatsoever 
about the psychiatric diagnosis.  The Board finds that the 
veteran engaged in combat with the enemy.  The veteran’s 
location in the Mekong Delta coupled with what is reported by 
the ESG, at very least raises a reasonable doubt as to this 
point.  Such doubt is resolved in the veteran’s favor.  
38 U.S.C.A. § 5107 (b), 38 C.F.R. § 3.102.

Moreover, there is a unanimity of medical opinion as to the 
fact that the veteran has PTSD which is due to his combat 
experiences.  Under these circumstances, the Board concludes 
that service connection for PTSD is warranted.  


ORDER

Service connection for PTSD is granted.  




		
	BRUCE E. HYMAN
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

The Board of Veterans' Appeals Administrative Procedures 
Improvement Act, Pub. L. No. 103-271, § 6, 108 Stat. 740, 741 
(1994), permits a proceeding instituted before the Board to 
be assigned to an individual member of the Board for a 
determination.  This proceeding has been assigned to an 
individual member of the Board.

NOTICE OF APPELLATE RIGHTS:  Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7266 (West 
1991 &  Supp. 1995), a decision of the Board of Veterans' 
Appeals granting less than the complete benefit, or benefits, 
sought on appeal is appealable to the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals within 120 days from the date of mailing of 
notice of the decision, provided that a Notice of 
Disagreement concerning an issue which was before the Board 
was filed with the agency of original jurisdiction on or 
after November 18, 1988.  Veterans' Judicial Review Act, 
Pub. L. No. 100-687, § 402, 102 Stat. 4105, 4122 (1988).  The 
date which appears on the face of this decision constitutes 
the date of mailing and the copy of this decision which you 
have received is your notice of the action taken on your 
appeal by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.
- 2 -


