Citation NR: 9624215	
Decision Date: 08/30/96		Archive Date: 09/04/96
DOCKET NO.  95-03 729	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in 
Portland, Oregon


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Oregon Department of Veterans' 
Affairs


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

Heather J. Harter, Associate Counsel




INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from August 1969 to March 
1971.
The veteran’s original claim included allegations of 
entitlement to service connection for other disabilities in 
addition to PTSD.  The substantive appeal, however, submitted 
in a timely fashion and signed by the veteran, was limited to 
the issue of entitlement to service connection for PTSD.  In 
the absence of a substantive appeal regarding the other 
disabilities originally claimed, the Board of Veterans’ 
Appeals (Board) has no jurisdiction over these issues and 
will not address them further herein.  38 C.F.R. §§ 20.200, 
20.202.


REMAND

The veteran contends that service connection is warranted for 
PTSD.  He asserts he experienced traumatic events during his 
Vietnam service and has suffered anxiety, nightmares, and 
thoughts of combat since discharge.

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence 
establishing a clear diagnosis of the condition, credible 
supporting evidence that the claimed inservice stressor 
actually occurred, and a link between current symptomatology 
and the claimed inservice stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) 
(1995).  In Zarycki v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 91 at 97 (1993), the 
United States Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) explained 
that if the veteran engaged in combat and the claimed 
stressor is related to combat, no further development for 
evidence of a stressor is necessary.  Where, however, the VA 
determines that the veteran did not engage in combat with the 
enemy, or that the veteran did engage in combat with the 
enemy but the claimed stressor is not related to such combat, 
the veteran’s lay testimony and/or written contentions, by 
themselves, will not be enough to establish the occurrence of 
the alleged stressor.  Instead, the record must contain 
service records which corroborate the veteran’s testimony as 
to the occurrence of the claimed stressor.  West v. Brown, 
7 Vet.App. 70 (1994).  The Court has held that the Board is 
not bound to accept the diagnosis of PTSD if the evidence of 
record does not objectively support that diagnosis.  Wood v. 
Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 406 (1991).

The veteran’s service personnel records are not in his claims 
file.  These records are necessary to corroborate the 
veteran’s reported assignments during service.  None of the 
events claimed to have been a stressor during service has 
been completely verified.  As outlined above, if the veteran 
participated in combat and the stressor is related to combat, 
no further development is necessary.  Upon remand, then, it 
must be determined whether the veteran participated in 
combat.  If not, further evidentiary development to 
corroborate the veteran’s contentions will be necessary.  In 
this regard, it is important to note that some of the events 
which the veteran claims occurred during service and which 
continue to haunt him, such as the rape and beating of a 
Vietnamese girl, and his involvement with drugs during 
service are most likely unverifiable and if true, would have 
constituted misconduct on his part.  Service connection may 
be granted only when a disability was not the result of the 
veteran’s own willful misconduct.  38 U.S.C.A. §§ 105, 1110; 
38 C.F.R. § 3.301(a).  

The veteran reports receiving psychiatric treatment from a 
Dr. Jablin soon after his discharge from service.  Apparently 
he was prescribed the drug Ritalin for symptoms of 
hyperactivity.  Records reflecting the veteran’s mental 
health proximate to service could be very probative on his 
claim.

Following this development, the RO should review the record 
to determine whether the facts supporting the veteran’s claim 
are materially different.  If the fact scenario has changed 
significantly, another VA psychiatric examination may be 
warranted.  The report of the January 1994 VA examination 
shows that the examination was particularly thorough, as it 
lasted for three sessions, covering a total of six hours of 
interviews with the veteran.  The report itself is quite 
comprehensive, covering the veteran’s history and mental 
status in depth.  In order to conserve administrative and 
judicial resources, the Board is of the opinion that unless 
further evidence is uncovered which would change the 
examiner’s understanding of the veteran’s history and 
background, an additional examination will not be necessary. 

To ensure that the VA has met its duty to assist the claimant 
in developing the facts pertinent to the claim and to ensure 
full compliance with due process requirements, the case is 
REMANDED to the RO for the following development:

1.  The RO should obtain copies of the 
veteran's complete service personnel 
file.
2.  The RO should obtain the names and 
addresses of all medical care providers 
who have treated the veteran for any 
psychiatric disorder since his discharge 
from service, including Dr. Jablin.  
After securing any necessary release(s), 
the RO should obtain complete clinical 
records of all such this treatment.

3.  The RO should obtain all records of 
VA medical treatment afforded to the 
veteran which are not contained in his 
claims file.

4.  The RO should make a formal 
determination as to whether the veteran 
engaged in combat for the purposes of 
evaluating his claimed PTSD stressors.  
If so, no further development regarding 
the veteran’s claimed stressors need be 
undertaken.  If not, the RO should 
verify, through official channels, all 
stressor events which do not involve 
misconduct on the part of the veteran.

5.  If the veteran’s claimed stressor is 
verified, as required by West v. Brown, 
7 Vet.App. 70 (1994), the RO must 
determine whether another VA examination 
to clarify the nature and etiology of the 
veteran’s psychiatric disability is 
necessary.  If the facts surrounding the 
veteran’s stressor events and psychiatric 
symptomatology have changed 
significantly, then another psychiatric 
examination is likely warranted.  If so, 
such an examination should be scheduled.

6.  After the development requested above 
is completed, the RO should again review 
the record.  If the benefit sought 
remains denied, the appellant and his 
representative should be furnished a 
supplemental statement of the case and 
given the opportunity to respond.

Thereafter, the case should be returned to the Board, if in 
order.  The Board intimates no opinion as to the ultimate 
outcome of this case.  The appellant need take no action 
unless otherwise notified.




		
	GEORGE R. SENYK
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals


The Board of Veterans' Appeals Administrative Procedures 
Improvement Act, Pub. L. No. 103-271, § 6, 108 Stat. 740, 741 
(1994), permits a proceeding instituted before the Board to 
be assigned to an individual member of the Board for a 
determination.  This proceeding has been assigned to an 
individual member of the Board.

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the 
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a 
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the 
Board on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) 
(1995).
- 2 -


