Citation NR: 9625756	
Decision Date: 09/12/96		Archive Date: 09/15/96
DOCKET NO.  93-15 485	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in 
St. Paul, Minnesota


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric 
disorder, to include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	AMVETS


WITNESSES AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant and R. [redacted]


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

G. Wm. Thompson, Counsel



INTRODUCTION

The veteran had active military service from March 1968 to 
October 1969.  His awards and decorations include the Fleet 
Marine Force Combat Operation Insignia for service with the 
U.S. Naval Mobile Construction Battalion TWENTY-TWO during 
the period August 31, 1968 to March 3, 1969.  The letter no-
tifying the veteran of this award dated in November 1968 
states that it is for “service performed in the combat zone.”  
He has no awards or decorations specific to combat.

The Board, in a decision in January 1991 denied service con-
nection for PTSD.  In an April 1993 rating action the RO 
found that new and material evidence had been submitted to 
reopen the veteran’s claim for service connection for PTSD; 
however, service connection was still denied.  The case was 
remanded for additional development in June 1995, and has 
been returned to the Board for further appellate considera-
tion.  


CONTENTIONS OF APPELLANT ON APPEAL

The veteran contends, in essence, that the RO erred in not 
finding that he evidence of record supports service connec-
tion for post-traumatic stress syndrome.  


DECISION OF THE BOARD

The Board, in accordance with the provisions of 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 7104 (West 1991 & Supp. 1995), has reviewed and considered 
all of the evidence and material of record in the veteran's 
claims file.  Based on its review of the relevant evidence in 
this matter, and for the following reasons and bases, it is 
the decision of the Board that the preponderance of the evi-
dence does not provide a basis for service connection for an 
acquired psychiatric disorder, to include post-traumatic 
stress disorder.


FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  The veteran served in Vietnam from August 31, 1968 to 
March 3, 1969; he received no combat awards or decorations. 

2.  During service the veteran was found to have inadequate 
personality (probably paranoid personality), and situational 
maladjustment.  

3.  The veteran has reported stressors in service; service 
records or other credible supporting evidence does not verify 
any of the claimed stressors; he did not engage in combat 
with the enemy.

4.  The veteran is not a reliable historian as to alleged 
stressful events in service; even if it were assumed that he 
did “engage in combat with the enemy” his accounts of his 
experiences are not satisfactory since they are contradicted 
by service records.

5.  Post-service there have been a multiplicity of diagnoses 
for the veteran, by various psychiatrists and psychologists, 
to include major depression, dysthymia, personality disorder, 
organic mood disorder, anxiety disorder, PTSD, and 
subthreshold post-traumatic stress disorder.

6.  There are no comprehensive and credible medical 
evaluations of the veteran that have diagnosed PTSD based 
upon actual, verified or credible experiences during active 
duty.

7.  There is no competent medical evidence that the veteran 
has an acquired psychiatric disorder, including PTSD, related 
to his active military service.  




CONCLUSION OF LAW

An acquired psychiatric disorder, to include post-traumatic 
stress disorder, was not incurred in or aggravated by active 
military service.  38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 1154(b) 5107(a) (West 
1991); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a)(d), 3.304(d)(f) (1995).  



REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

The veteran served in the Republic of South Vietnam, and 
there are diagnoses of PTSD in VA clinical records.  On the 
basis of this evidence, the Board finds his claim for service 
connection for PTSD plausible, and thus well-grounded.  
Murphy v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 78, 81 (1990).  The Board 
further finds that the RO has amply discharged the duty to 
assist under 38 U.S.C.A. § 5107(a).

Basically, the applicable law and regulations provide that 
service connection can be established if a particular disease 
or injury, resulting in disability, is incurred coincident 
with service, if a disability is found to be proximately due 
to or the result of a service-connected disease or injury, or 
if a chronic disease, as specified in 38 U.S.C.A. § 1101, is 
manifested to a compensable degree within one year thereaf-
ter.  Presumptive periods are not intended to limit service 
connection to diseases so diagnosed when the evidence 
warrants direct service connection.  Determinations as to 
service connection will be based on review of the entire 
evidence of record, with due consideration of the policy of 
the VA to administer the law under a broad and liberal 
interpretation consistent with the facts in each individual 
case.  38 C.F.R. §§ 3.303(a)(b)(c)(d), 3.307, 3.309, 3.310.

A determination of service connection for post-traumatic 
stress disorder requires medical evidence establishing a 
clear diagnosis thereof, credible supporting evidence that 
the claimed service stressors actually occurred, and a link, 
established by medical evidence, between current 
symptomatology and the claimed service stressor.  If the 
claimed stressor is related to combat, service department 
evidence that the veteran engaged in combat or that he was 
awarded the requisite combat citations will be accepted, in 
the absence of evidence to the contrary, as conclusive 
evidence of the claimed in service stressors.  38 C.F.R. 
§ 3.304(f) (1995).  In a case where PTSD is claimed as a 
result of combat stressors, there must be a specific finding 
as to whether the veteran was engaged in combat and, if so, 
whether the claimed stressor(s) is/are related to combat.  
Zarycki v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 91, 98 (1993).  If he was not 
engaged in combat, or if he was but the claimed stressor(s) 
are not related to combat, his lay testimony of in service 
stressors is insufficient, standing alone, to establish 
service connection, it must be corroborated by credible 
supporting evidence.  While service records are not the only 
means of corroborating the existence of the stressors, those 
service records which are available must support, i.e. must 
not contradict, his lay testimony concerning his non-combat 
related stressors.  Doran v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 283 (1994).

Psychiatric Disability, including PTSD

The veteran was in a construction battalion in Vietnam from 
August 1968 to March 1969.  A Deployment Completion Report 
for his unit, for the above time period, lists significant 
events during the deployment.  Two incidents of hostile 
activity were noted.  One involved a member of the unit who 
sustained lacerations of the face and neck from a booby trap 
on October 13, 1968.  The location of this incident was south 
of Da Nang and the injured serviceman was working with a 
marine unit.  Service medical records show that two days 
before and two days after this incident, the veteran was seen 
by medical personnel.  He was noted to be working as a mess 
cook on the first occasion and that there had been “no 
problems” during the intervening four days when he was seen 
on the second occasion.  The Deployment Completion Report 
shows that in early December 1968, at quarry crusher site 
operated by the unit came under mortar and small arms fire, 
and 2 men were wounded.  This incident was highlighted.  No 
other incidents of hostile activity were noted.

Background.  The consensus of information gleaned from social 
work, psychological and psychiatric examination reports in 
file indicate that the veteran lived with his grandparents 
until the 7th grade when his mother remarried.  He reportedly 
had problems with an abusive, alcoholic stepfather, ran away 
in high school, had a probation officer, lived at a facility 
away from his parents, and graduated from high school in 
1965.  After high school, and before service he went to 
mechanic training schools in North Dakota, and Nebraska.  On 
at least one occasion, in October 1984, the veteran denied 
any alcohol abuse in his family.

Service medical records show that in late September 1968 he 
was referred for evaluation by his crew chief.  A flat effect 
was noted.  In October 1968 it was noted that while on mess 
duty the veteran was again referred by his chief as unable to 
get along with others and “potential trouble.”  It was noted 
that he reported being tense and having been threatened by 
others he lived with; he also reported being unable to sleep.   
He was provided Librium.  His complaints of nervousness and 
sleep problems continued in October.  Family problems were 
noted, as were “paranoid” thoughts about the veteran’s fellow 
workers.  The impression was inadequate personality (probably 
paranoid personality).  He was provided Equanil and returned 
to duty.  Later in October the veteran was again referred by 
his chief as he had been in 2 fights in 2 days, and was 
unable to get along with anyone.  The impression was true 
paranoid tendencies, exact type unknown, and a psychiatric 
evaluation was requested.  It was noted that as the report 
was written the veteran continued to talk and seemed to be 
disoriented.

Psychiatric evaluation was performed in late October 1968 
aboard a hospital ship, and at that time the veteran 
complained of fighting, nervousness and insomnia.  A brief 
history was given; there was no reference to any exposure to 
any combat incident or exposure to others who had been killed 
or wounded.  On mental status exam his affect was flat but he 
exhibited no evidence of psychosis, or disabling neurosis.  
He wanted to operate a 5 ton truck, complete his training and 
service, and was worried about his mother.  The impression 
was situational maladjustment.  He was returned to duty at 
the end of October 1968, and there were no further recorded 
relevant complaints for the remainder of his time in service.  
When examined for separation in October 1969, in his 
contemporaneously prepared Report of Medical History, the 
veteran denied having or having now, depression or nervous 
trouble of any sort.  

The veteran’s medical history briefly resumes in February and 
April 1976, when seen by the VA.  In February he complained 
of being socially inept and problems around girls.  A brief 
personal history was given.  The impression was mild depres-
sion in a veteran of dull normal intelligence which seemed to 
impair social interaction, creating problems on the job and 
with girls.  He failed to show for a scheduled appointment at 
the mental health clinic in March 1976 but showed up at the 
internal medicine clinic April with complaints to include 
seeing stars when he is walking.  He thought he had an ulcer.  
It was noted that he worried a lot.  

The veteran’s VA medical history begins in earnest in 1983.  
At that time he complained of being jumpy, nervous, uptight 
and under pressure since Vietnam.  MMPI (Minnesota 
Multiphasic Personality Inventory) testing in March 1983 
resulted in an impression of situational depression in a man 
with prominent emotional and behavioral instability.  When 
seen at a mental health clinic in April 1983 he stated that 
he had a lot of bitter memories about Vietnam but had no 
nightmares or flashbacks.  He suspected his temper was 
related to his Vietnam experience.  On psychological 
evaluation in April 1983, the impression was adjustment 
reaction with disturbance of emotions.  In December 1983 the 
impression was adjustment reaction, alcohol abuse.  Reference 
was made to stress related to unemployment.

In 1984 the veteran was seen for medical problems associated 
with tattoo removal, and in October 1984 for depression.  
MMPI results in October 1984 were interpreted as showing a 
depressed and anxious individual, likely to be impulsive and 
have troubled thought patterns.  The diagnosis for the 
veteran were dysthymic disorder, and passive-dependent 
personality disorder.  In an October 1984 referral for 
Vietnam group therapy, it was noted that the and seen some 
“blood and bodies” and felt that his life had been adversely 
affected by his experiences in Vietnam.  The provisional 
diagnosis was dysthymic disorder.  It was noted that he was 
in the National Guard.  The veteran received private 
treatment in October 1986 following a truck accident in which 
he sustained a head injury.  He was hospitalized in November 
and December 1986, feeling dysphoric since discontinuing work 
as a truck driver.  He reported similar symptoms after losing 
his job in 1984.  He denied nightmares or intrusive thoughts 
of service.  Again there was an MMPI profile in November 
1986, suggesting a personality disorder with depression and 
anxiety.  A November counseling report asked the veteran 
about life threatening events in service, and on a scale of 0 
(the lowest) to 10 (the highest), the veteran reported some-
times a 2 and sometimes a 7, noting that he was fired upon, 
and had returned fire.  He did not know of any loss of life 
in his immediate unit.  The diagnosis was major depression 
without melancholia.  

In 1988 the veteran was concerned about his memory loss.  
There was a question of organic versus function impairment.  
When hospitalized from October 1988 to February 1989 the 
diagnosis was major depression.  In November 1988 it was 
noted that there was no evidence of organic impairment, and 
MMPI showed marked depression and qualities of a personality 
disorder or PTSD.  In a November 1988 treatment plan the 
diagnosis was major depression.  A November 1988 CT 
(computerized tomography) scan of the veteran’s brain showed 
mild atrophy.  

In December 1988 the veteran reported doing “security” for 
work crews at night, seeing dead bodies on hanging on wires, 
and during the Tet offensive in 1968, at Vinh Dai, being in a 
4 man bunker, with firing going on at night.  He stated he 
was sent to a hospital ship because his nerves were “shot.”  

The veteran was hospitalized in June and July 1989 for 
depression, despondency and discouragement, and the diagnosis 
was organic personality disorder.  He also received treatment 
in a day care center in 1989.  In a closing summary from the 
day care treatment center, in November 1989, the diagnosis 
was organic personality disorder.

VA psychiatric examination was performed in August 1989 it 
was noted that the veteran had great difficulty in adjust to 
people and stated that while in Vietnam he was sent to a 
hospital ship because of his difficulties in getting along 
with people.  The veteran stated that most of his friends had 
either died of natural causes or committed suicide and that 
this had left him essentially alone.  The examiner opined 
that his chronic and sever depression was an anaclitic 
depression based on his apparent chronic deprivation 
throughout childhood.  The diagnoses were major depression, 
history of alcohol abuse, and possible organic personality 
disorder.

VA out-patient treatment record show the appellant was seen 
by a psychiatric social worker and a physician on May 23, 
1991.  The notes show detailed descriptions of the veteran 
current occupational and social difficulties, recorded 
complaints of irritability, headaches, sadness weakness and 
anxious about his job and future.  There was no reference to 
any experience in service, nightmares, flashbacks or any 
“reexperiencing” phenomena.  Assessment included “PTSD - 
depression.”  Further outpatient records in this series 
through 1991 show a similar pattern of complaints and 
concerns, with at least one other notation of PTSD.  Later in 
the year, diagnosis was noted to be organic mood disorder and 
organic personality disorder.  In the first months of 1992, 
the same pattern continues.  Diagnosis at the end of March 
1992 was depression and personality disorder. 

A VA physician, G. Falk, M.D., in a February 1992 medical 
statement for the a state job training department, reported 
that the veteran had “depression, post traumatic stress 
disorder-memory.”  There was no explanation for the basis for 
these diagnoses.

[redacted] and [redacted], former employers of the veteran, in a 
statement dated in September 1992, noted that the veteran 
worked for them over three months in 1991-1992 and that he 
would wake up in the middle of the night screaming.

[redacted], in a statement dated in October 1992, 
identified himself as a friend of the veteran’s since 1961, 
going to high school together until 1965, when the population 
of one high school was divided up between 3 high schools, and 
he and the veteran were split up.  Mutual friends and 
activities were reported.  Mr. [redacted] noted that in 
November 1967, before he shipped over to Vietnam, he slept at 
the veteran’s apartment the veteran, and the veteran had no 
problems sleeping.  Mr. [redacted] detailed events surrounding 
the veteran’s employment in 1969, and exploitation of his 
sensitivity to loud noises.  In 1976 he observed the veteran 
waking up in the night and screaming about “gooks.”  

VA psychiatry service progress notes, in 1992 and 1993 show 
diagnoses of personality disorder and depression in 1992, and 
in September 1993 it was noted that after evaluation in 
January he was felt to have PTSD.  The diagnoses were 
dysthymia and PTSD.  

For purposes of clarity and simplicity, the Board will break 
the chronological discussion of the evidence to note next a 
social work report in January 1993.  This document noted that 
Mr. [redacted] made a strong case that the veteran’s behavior 
totally changed since Vietnam.  Military history provided by 
the veteran indicated he first heard bombs going off when he 
deplaned in Vietnam.  He stated he was initially assigned to 
a rock crusher and being there about a month, driving a dump 
truck and getting lost and having a Vietnamese jump up on his 
truck and say GI you die.  Also while driving a dump truck he 
saw a small helicopter blow up, and after 3 months of combat 
he was assigned to a perimeter guard tower but was too 
freighted to stay up in the tower.  After 3 or 4 months in 
country he observed MP (military police) activity at an off 
limits area, and 3 or 4 body bags were pulled out and he was 
told “a couple” marines had been killed trying to “get laid.”  
After 6 or 8 months in country, while operating a bulldozer, 
he received incoming fire and took refuge under the dozer.  
After that he was sent to a hospital ship to se a 
psychiatrist.  He reported that after 10 months in country he 
went to a PX (post exchange) next to a landing strip for a 
hospital and he could “see WIA’s and KIA’s being unloaded, 
hear them screaming”.  After 6 or 8 months in country while 
driving in a convoy he saw 7 or 8 VC (Viet Cong) bodies 
hanging on a fence.  He noted spending the rest of his tour 
on a security bunker with 4 men manning an M60 and next to a 
tank.  It was reported that the veteran had constant dreams 
about seeing the helicopter explode, seeing the body bags, 
and the boy jumping on his truck.  It was noted that the 
veteran could not remember events in sequence.  The report 
was completed by R. Bourdaghs, clinical social worker.

In a statement dated in October 1992 the veteran recounted 
the various incidents in Vietnam that he felt were traumatic, 
including a person jumping on his truck, a helicopter blowing 
up, being at the PX when wounded were flown in, operating a 
bulldozer when receiving incoming fire, 4 dead marines in an 
off limits area, watch tower duty, a tank next to the bunker, 
being dragged to safety during a mortar attack, dead VC, and 
waking up to find a woman in his hut.  He indicated that he 
did not know why he was sent to a hospital ship.

In hearing testimony in November 1992, [redacted] provided 
testimony essentially the same as in his statement in 
October, Transcript, pages 2-7.  In recounting traumatic 
incidents, the veteran noted that the dozer incident was 
while making a disposal plant.  Transcript, pages 10, 11, 12, 
13, 16, 17, 18, 20 and 21.  

Dr. Falk, in a statement dated in March 1993 opined that he 
believed, based on observations of the veteran and 
information from Mr. Bourdaghs, that the veteran had a 
primary diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.  

Per the June 1995 remand request, the veteran underwent VA 
psychiatric examination and testing, in October 1995.  In a 
history of psychosocial stressors completed by the veteran he 
reported first going to Vietnam in April 1968, seeing people 
killed and wounded twice a week, and being wounded or injured 
in Vietnam.  

Psychological testing and evaluation was performed in October 
1995.  A back ground and history was given.  It was noted 
that the veteran described himself as a small lonely child 
picked on and beaten up a few time by peers, and he acknowl-
edged significant problems with interpersonal distrust as an 
adolescent.  He received poor grades in school and was in 
special education classes for math and reading.  Traumatic 
events recounted by the veteran included small arms and 
mortar fire approximately once a week, observing the bodies 
of dead VC “a couple” times, witnessing 2 dead marines that 
had been stabbed in the back at a whorehouse, and witnessing 
at close range 2 men killed when a chopper they were in was 
hit by a mortar.  He stated he was afraid the whole time he 
was in Vietnam.  It was noted that the events described were 
probably sufficient to meet DSM-III-R criterion.  

It was recorded that the veteran’s response regarding 
possible PTSD symptoms were ambiguous and made rating quite 
difficult.  Under criterion B (persistent reexperiencing of 
the event), his reports were vague and he was unable to 
specify any recurrent and intrusive distressing recollection 
of events describe above.  He reported a history of 
nightmares but was unable to provide details about specific 
content in his dreams.  It was noted that while he possibly 
met the criteria for criteria A, B, and D on the SCID PTSD 
module, he provided insufficient evidence meeting criterion 
C.  A Mississippi Scale testing was performed in September 
1995, and suggest mild PTSD symptomatology.  Reference was 
made to MMPI-2 testing twice during hospitalization in 
September 1995, and that both profiles were invalid.  The 
results of the MMPI tests in 1983, 1984 and 1988 were 
reviewed.

The evaluation impression was that the present evaluation 
suggested the presence of PTSD symptomatology, but provided 
insufficient evidence to establish a firm diagnosis.  Overall 
the results did not clearly support a diagnosis of PTSD.  The 
diagnostic impression was dysthymia, anxiety disorder NOS 
(subthreshold PTSD symptomatology) and personality disorder 
NOS.

Psychiatric evaluation was also conducted in October 1995.  
The veteran reported being exposed to mortar and artillery 
attacks, perhaps once a week, and during the TET offensive in 
1968 he reported being exposed to rocket and mortar attacks 
and being very frightened.  He said some of his acquaintances 
were killed but could give no details regarding that.  He 
also reported seeing 4 or 5 dead north Vietnamese on barbed 
wire, seeing a helicopter blown up after leaving the ground , 
seeing some wounded in a hospital and some body bags 
containing 2 marines ostensible killed in a “house of ill 
fame.”  He reported being sent to a hospital ship when he 
became nervous.  In a review of personal history it was noted 
that he had been in a correctional facility for delinquent 
teenagers for about 2 years.  

On mental status examination paranoid trends were evident and 
the veteran appeared quite pessimistic and chronically mildly 
to moderately depressed.  Some psychomotor retardation “may 
be present.”  Thought was constricted and judgment appeared 
to be impaired by paranoid ideation and orientation.  Insight 
appeared to be poor.  There was no significant memory 
impairment noted; however he did have some difficulty 
remembering dates.

The examiner reviewed the veteran’s pre-military, military, 
and post-military history, as well as the psychological 
testing.  It was noted that the exact psychiatric diagnosis 
was difficult in view of the multiplicity of diagnoses made 
previously, and the many diagnostic factors and features some 
of which seemed to cross over the different diagnostic lines.  
The examiner felt that while the veteran met criterion A he 
was subthreshold for criterion B.  There was no intense 
psychological distress, no recurrent intrusive recollection 
of the traumatic events, and he was no longer having 
nightmares.  He did not act or feel as if the events were 
recurring.  In regard to criterion C he did nave a sense of 
foreshortened future, but this was his usual depressive 
pessimistic view of the world.  It was believed he was 
subthreshold for criterion C, and as far as criterion D was 
concerned he had no hyperviligence, sleep disturbance, and 
the startle response did not appear to be severe.  It was 
opined that he veteran had some manifestations of post-
traumatic stress disorder, but the examiner believed they may 
have been of subthreshold magnitude and perhaps half of his 
psychopathology and impaired social and vocational 
functioning had been based on personality disorder, anxiety 
and depression, and that this was only partially related to 
PTSD.  It was noted that Dr. Kang had mentioned the veteran 
having an obsessive concern about compensation issues.  

Analysis.  The Board must first note as a preliminary matter 
that it is evident that the veteran now has arrived at the 
firm and sincere personal conviction that he experiences a 
psychiatric disorder attributable to his service in Vietnam.  
Although the Board must point out below some obvious 
discrepancies in the record, the Board by no means believes 
that these discrepancies stem from any deliberate fabrication 
as opposed to simply inaccurate memory.  Further, the record 
is clear that the veteran performed his assigned duties in 
Vietnam and that his life has not been easy either before or 
after service.  None of these factors, alone or collectively, 
however, provides a basis for favorable action.  

The starting point for any determination with regard to PTSD 
is one or more “stressors.”  The existence of a stressor, 
though not its quality, is an adjudicative, not a medical 
determination.  Zarycki v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 91 (1993).  The 
Board finds nothing in the documentary evidence of record 
from the service department, either in the form of 
administrative or medical records, to show that the veteran 
“engaged in combat with the enemy.”  His awards and 
decorations are not combat related, and his duties and 
assignments were with a support unit.  With respect to the 
award of the Fleet Marine Force Combat Operation Insignia, 
the Board must point out that the authorizing letter 
specifically states the basis of the award was “service 
performed in the combat zone,” not “combat service,” 
“participation in combat” “participation in combat with the 
enemy” or some other description that would begin to support 
a finding that he engaged in combat with the enemy.  
Moreover, and of considerable weight in this case, the unit 
deployment report does not support a finding of “combat with 
the enemy.”  In view of this record, the Board finds the 
appellant did not engage in combat with the enemy and thus is 
not entitled to any presumption of validity of his accounts 
of alleged “stressors.”

Further, with respect to what the unit deployment report 
documents, the veteran’s more recent accounts of being 
exposed very frequently, that is on the order of once a week 
or even more, to incoming fire from the enemy is flatly 
contradicted.  The report details only two episodes where 
members of the unit were under fire or wounded.  It is 
impossible to believe from the contents of this report that 
it would have been wholly silent about such very frequent 
enemy action, not to mention the difficulty in believing that 
such frequent enemy fire could have produced no other wounds 
or injuries.   With respect to the quality of his accounts, 
the Board notes that the great bulk of them have been very 
vague and general.  Although he alleged that acquaintances 
were killed, he has identified none and his unit report makes 
it clear that there were no combat related fatalities in his 
construction battalion.  While the veteran reports memory 
problems, no significant memory problem was noted on 
examination in October 1995.  In fact the Board notes an 
increase in the veteran’s recollection of events in Vietnam 
over the years.  In 1988 he had about 3 events to relate but 
currently he has about tripled his stories.  

His tales of stressful events often contain some 
discrepancies in the telling and retelling.  The event where 
he was exposed to small arms fire while on a bulldozer does 
not correlate with any significant event in the unit 
deployment report.  In the unit report 2 men were injured in 
early December 1968 while at a quarry at a rock crusher site.  
The veteran reports his event occurring at a disposal site, 6 
to 8 months after arriving in Vietnam, and he makes no 
reference to anyone being wounded.  The Board also notes that 
the veteran in 1988 and 1995, placed himself in Vietnam 
during the Tet offensive in 1968.  His service record show he 
arrived in Vietnam in August 1968, after the Tet offensive 
very early in the year.  The episode with marines killed 
while at a “house of ill repute” has varied in the telling 
over the years, originally starting with 3 to 4 body bags and 
a “couple” marines, then 4 bodies, and currently only 2 
bodies, that had been stabbed.  The incident of seeing 
wounded marines was said to occur 10 months after being in 
country.  Although his accounts have implied a link between 
combat related stress and his referral to the hospital ship, 
the actual records of that referral make no such connection.  
Further, in referring to flashbacks and intrusive thoughts, 
during the October 1995 psychological evaluation, he was 
unable to provide details about specific content in his 
dreams.  In light of all of the above, the Board does not 
find his accounts of alleged stressors are credible.  The 
Board must point out in this context that adjudicators are 
not bound to accept the findings of health professionals 
concerning accounts of alleged “stressors.”  Wood v. Der-
winski, 1 Vet.App. 190 (1991).

There is a further and fundamental reason why the veteran’s 
claim for service connection for PTSD must be denied.  A 
determination of service connection requires a finding of the 
existence of a current disability and a determination of a 
relationship between that disability and an injury or disease 
incurred in service.   Watson v. Brown, 4 Vet.App. 309, 314 
(1993).  In this case the Board concludes that the diagnoses 
of PTSD by Dr. Falk are not entitled to probative weight.  
First of all, these diagnoses are by no means supported by a 
detailed comparison of the diagnostic criteria for PTSD with 
the facts in this case.  Further, insofar as Dr. Falk relied 
upon the accounts of alleged stressors that the Board does 
not find credible, the Board finds that the diagnosis is not 
supportable.  Black v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 177 (1993).  
Further, the October 1995 psychiatric examination and 
evaluation, which were extremely detailed and comprehensive, 
have not found manifestations of PTSD that support a 
diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder for the veteran.  
The psychiatric examiner felt that most of the criteria for a 
diagnosis of PTSD were subthreshold.  The Board finds this 
medical opinion as to the existence of a current PTSD is 
entitled to the greatest weight.  Since this opinion is that 
the veteran does not have PTSD, the requirements of Watson 
are not met.  Accordingly, the Board concludes that the 
overwhelming weight of the evidence is against the claim for 
PTSD and the doctrine of reasonable doubt is not for 
application. 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 1154, 5107; 38 C.F.R. 
§ 3.303, 3.304.

In regard to the post-service diagnosis of an acquired 
psychiatric disorder, variously diagnosed, it is for 
consideration that there is no competent medical evidence 
associating any such disorder with any event of his active 
military service, including the evaluation on the hospital 
ship in October 1968.  It has been indicated, at least once, 
that the veteran’s depression is associated with his 
childhood development.  

In regard to the statements by [redacted] concerning the 
veteran’s conduct before and after Vietnam, the Board notes 
that Mr. [redacted], in discussing the veteran’s high school 
years, makes no reference to the veteran’s family problems, 
his separation from his family, or the veteran’s residence 
during his last year or two of high school.  He also made no 
reference to the veteran’s academic problems in school.  It 
on this basis, the Board does not find Mr. [redacted]’s 
recollections to be credible, not in the sense of whether he 
reports honestly what he now recollects, but in the sense of 
whether his recollections are accurate.  Given the dramatic 
difference between Mr. [redacted]’s recollections of events 
prior to service and the actual record, the Board finds that 
Mr. [redacted]’s recollections of post service events likewise 
are highly suspect.  Further, the vivid description of 
nightmares is contradicted by the absence of such complaints 
when the appellant was initially seen, and by the current 
findings which emphasize the lack of indication that the 
appellant reexperiences events in service.  Ultimately, of 
course, such lay evidence from Mr. [redacted] or the Fallens 
could not establish medical diagnosis or causation, and thus 
can not serve as competent evidence of the presence of PTSD 
or any psychiatric disorder related to service.  


ORDER

Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, 
including PTSD is denied.



		
	RICHARD B. FRANK
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

The Board of Veterans' Appeals Administrative Procedures 
Improvement Act, Pub. L. No. 103-271, § 6, 108 Stat. 740, 741 
(1994), permits a proceeding instituted before the Board to 
be assigned to an individual member of the Board for a 
determination.  This proceeding has been assigned to an 
individual member of the Board.

NOTICE OF APPELLATE RIGHTS:  Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7266 (West 
1991 &  Supp. 1995), a decision of the Board of Veterans' 
Appeals granting less than the complete benefit, or benefits, 
sought on appeal is appealable to the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals within 120 days from the date of mailing of 
notice of the decision, provided that a Notice of 
Disagreement concerning an issue which was before the Board 
was filed with the agency of original jurisdiction on or 
after November 18, 1988.  Veterans' Judicial Review Act, 
Pub. L. No. 100-687, § 402, 102 Stat. 4105, 4122 (1988).  The 
date which appears on the face of this decision constitutes 
the date of mailing and the copy of this decision which you 
have received is your notice of the action taken on your 
appeal by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.

- 2 -


