Citation NR: 9627614	
Decision Date: 09/26/96		Archive Date: 10/07/96
DOCKET NO.  94-13 189	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Muskogee, 
Oklahoma


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Disabled American Veterans


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

M. Reynolds, Associate Counsel



INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from November 1965 to 
November 1968.

This appeal arises from a rating decision from the Muskogee, 
Oklahoma, Regional Office (RO), in which entitlement to 
service connection for PTSD was denied.


CONTENTIONS OF APPELLANT ON APPEAL

The veteran contends, in essence that he currently suffer 
from PTSD as a result of his service in Vietnam.  He 
maintains therefore that service connection is warranted.


DECISION OF THE BOARD

The Board, in accordance with the provisions of 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 7104 (West 1991 & Supp. 1995), has reviewed and considered 
all of the evidence and material of record in the veteran's 
claims file.  Based on its review of the relevant evidence in 
this matter, and for the following reasons and bases, it is 
the decision of the Board that the preponderance of the 
evidence is against the claim for service connection for 
PTSD.  


FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  All relevant evidence necessary for an equitable 
disposition of the veteran’s claim has been developed.

2.  The evidence of record does not show a clear diagnosis of 
PTSD, nor does it show a link, established by medical 
evidence, between current symptomatology and the claimed 
inservice stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f) (1995).


CONCLUSION OF LAW

PTSD was not incurred in or aggravated by active service.  
38 U.S.C.A. § 1110 (West 1991 & Supp. 1995);  38 C.F.R. 
§ 3.304(f) (1995).

REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

BACKGROUND

The veteran’s service medical records are silent for any 
complaints, treatment, or diagnosis of PTSD.

In March 1988, the veteran was admitted to the Carl Albert 
Community Mental Health Center.  A psychosocial evaluation 
dated in May 1988 indicated that the veteran was unemployed 
and living with his mother.  It was reported that the veteran 
was arrested for shooting his wife following a domestic 
argument.  The veteran stated that he had a problem with 
alcohol abuse which he felt was related to a chronic problem 
of depression.  He denied any suicidal or homicidal thoughts.  
The Axis I diagnosis was life circumstances problem.  Upon 
discharge in October 1988, the veteran was diagnosed with 
alcohol dependence.

A medical record dated in April 1991, showed that the veteran 
was admitted to the substance abuse treatment unit on March 
30, 1991 for treatment for alcohol dependence and depression.  
Upon discharge it was reported that he was sober, his 
emotional reactions were adequately controlled, and he did 
not display any symptoms of psychotic disturbance, and his 
behavior was appropriate.  He denied any suicidal or 
homicidal ruminations.  The veteran did not show any 
deterioration of intellectual or emotional functioning.  The 
discharge diagnoses were alcohol dependence, continuous 
dysthymic disorder.

In May 1991 the veteran was again admitted to the Carl Albert 
Community Mental Health Center.  It was indicated that his 
problems included anxiety and being released from prison and 
he requested assistance dealing with this.  The discharge 
diagnosis provided by Richard Brown, MSW, was PTSD and 
substance abuse.

VA outpatient treatment records dated from May 1991 to July 
1992, showed that the veteran received treatment regarding 
alcohol abuse, in addition to counseling regarding PTSD.  The 
veteran reported having nightmares, anger and depression.  

The veteran was hospitalized on a voluntary basis from May 
14, to June 17, 1992 at the VA Medical Center, Waco, Texas, 
(VAMC).  On admission, he had complaints of insomnia, 
nightmares, depression, suicidal thoughts off and on, anger, 
and intrusive thoughts about Vietnam.  He reported that he 
had been having these symptoms off and on for the past ten 
years.  Upon discharge, it was reported that he had improved 
and had better coping skills but had some PTSD symptoms.  He 
was free of psychotic symptoms and was not considered 
dangerous to himself or others.  The Axis I diagnosis was 
PTSD.

The veteran underwent a VA PTSD examination in August 1992.  
It was reported that he was coherent and goal directed with 
no overt thinking disorder.  He had a depressed mood and a 
flattened affect.  No memory insufficiencies were noted and 
insight was adequate.  The diagnosis was adjustment disorder, 
depressed mood.  The examiner commented:  “Based upon the 
evidence in C-file and from this exam I cannot substantiate a 
diagnosis of PTSD.  No clear cut stressors identified and no 
significant intrusive thoughts apparent to me.”

In a statement dated in March 1993 from James W. Howarth, 
Counselor, it was indicated that the veteran was seen about 
ten years prior for treatment of symptoms diagnosed as PTSD.  
It was reported that the veteran continued to have problems 
and difficulties associated with his Vietnam experience.  He 
had problems with sleeping, bad dreams, and nightmares of 
traumas experiences in Vietnam.  It was stated that the 
veteran was easily startled, moody, irritable and tends to 
withdraw from others.  The diagnostic impression was PTSD.

VA medical record dated in June 1993 showed that the veteran 
was hospitalized from May 24, to June 18, 1993 with the chief 
complaint of alcoholism.  The discharge diagnoses were 
alcohol dependence and PTSD.

During a VA PTSD examination performed in October 1993, it 
was reported that while in Vietnam, the veteran drove an 
ammunition truck and was in three rocket attacks and some 
mortar attacks.  He stated that he saw people killed and 
wounded.  On examination there was no psychosis, delusions, 
or hallucinations noted.  He was goal oriented and judgment 
was fair.  The impression was alcohol dependence, chronic, 
moderate; dysthymia, mild, chronic.  The examiner commented: 

“ I don’t see enough stressors nor do I 
get the feel of a patient who has been 
troubled with PTSD symptoms after his 
return to the states.  Granted he had 
some fights and then had some nightmares 
for a brief period of time.  I realize 
that a lot of people have gone to the 
trouble of documenting that he has PTSD 
but I just don’t see it.”


The veteran underwent a VA examination in July 1994.  The 
examination was performed by the same VA physician who 
conducted the October 1993 examination.  The examiner 
commented “ I still do not see enough in this case to change 
my opinion about the PTSD.  I don’t see it in this man.”

In a report dated in July 1995, the U.S. Army and Joint 
Services Environmental Support Group confirmed that the 
veteran’s unit in Vietnam received mortar and rocket attacks.

The veteran underwent another VA PTSD examination in December 
1995.  He reported that he has trouble getting and staying 
asleep.  He said he handles stress by hollering, yelling or 
trying to avoid it.  He reported being depressed and that he 
cries easily.  He reported occasional thoughts of suicide.  
On examination, he was cooperative, goal oriented, and 
oriented to time, place, and person.  He was able to organize 
his thoughts and express himself.  His affect was moderate, 
with mild to moderate depression.  There was no psychosis, 
delusions, or hallucinations.  The impression was dysthymia, 
chronic alcohol dependence.  His incapacity to work and 
socialize was reported to be mild.  There was no diagnosis of 
PTSD rendered.





ANALYSIS

In accordance with 38 U.S.C.A. § 5107 (West 1991 & Supp. 
1995), and Murphy v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. (1990), the 
appellant has presented a meritorious or well-grounded claim.  
The facts relevant to this appeal have been properly 
developed and the obligation of the Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) to assist the veteran in the development of his 
claim has been satisfied.  Id.

Service connection may be granted, in part, for “disability 
resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted 
in the line of duty....”38 U.S.C.A. § 1110 (West 1991 & Supp. 
1995).  The provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (1995) govern 
the granting of service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder.  This regulation provides that service connection 
may be granted where there is a “clear diagnosis of the 
condition, credible supporting evidence that the claimed 
inservice stressor actually occurred, and a link, established 
by medical evidence, between current symptomatology and the 
claimed inservice stressor.”  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (1995).

The Board notes that the veteran has been diagnosed as having 
PTSD on several occasions, however, the evidence of record 
fails to provide a clear diagnosis of the condition.  
Specifically, the most recent VA examination of the veteran 
dated in December 1995, noted that there were no psychosis, 
delusions, or hallucinations, and failed to render a 
diagnosis of PTSD.  Instead, the diagnoses were dysthymia, 
and chronic alcohol dependence.  Similarly, during the VA 
examination dated in October 1993, the examiner stated in 
part: “I don’t see enough stressors nor do I get the feel of 
a patient who has been trouble with PTSD symptoms after his 
return to the states... I just don’t see it.”  These findings 
were confirmed on the July 1994 VA examination.

Moreover, the evidence of record does not adequately provide 
a link, established by medical evidence, between current 
symptomatology and the claimed inservice stressor, as 
required under 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).  As claimed stressors, 
the veteran reports that while in Vietnam he was under three 
rocket attacks and one mortar attack.  He also indicated that 
he lived in constant fear of being hit.  However, none of the 
diagnoses of PTSD cited by the veteran specifically relates 
PTSD to the identified stressors.  A diagnosis of PTSD alone 
is not enough to grant service connection, it must be linked 
to an inservice stressor.  No such connection has been shown.

Therefore, in the absence of a clear diagnosis of PTSD, and 
the lack evidence of a link between current symptomatology 
and the claimed inservice stressors, the preponderance of the 
evidence is against the veteran’s claim for service 
connection for PTSD.


ORDER

Entitlement to service connection for PTSD is denied.



		
	JACK W. BLASINGAME
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

The Board of Veterans' Appeals Administrative Procedures 
Improvement Act, Pub. L. No. 103-271, § 6, 108 Stat. 740, 741 
(1994), permits a proceeding instituted before the Board to 
be assigned to an individual member of the Board for a 
determination.  This proceeding has been assigned to an 
individual member of the Board.

NOTICE OF APPELLATE RIGHTS:  Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7266 (West 
1991 &  Supp. 1995), a decision of the Board of Veterans' 
Appeals granting less than the complete benefit, or benefits, 
sought on appeal is appealable to the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals within 120 days from the date of mailing of 
notice of the decision, provided that a Notice of 
Disagreement concerning an issue which was before the Board 
was filed with the agency of original jurisdiction on or 
after November 18, 1988.  Veterans' Judicial Review Act, 
Pub. L. No. 100-687, § 402, 102 Stat. 4105, 4122 (1988).  The 
date which appears on the face of this decision constitutes 
the date of mailing and the copy of this decision which you 
have received is your notice of the action taken on your 
appeal by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.
- 2 -


