Citation NR: 9635470	
Decision Date: 12/16/96		Archive Date: 12/24/96
DOCKET NO.  95-17 041	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Winston-
Salem, North Carolina


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric 
disability, to include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	The American Legion


WITNESSES AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant and his spouse


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

K. Johnson, Associate Counsel

INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from September 1968 to 
August 1970.

This matter initially came to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals 
(Board) from a November 1994 decision of the Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in Winston-Salem, 
North Carolina, which denied service connection for a nervous 
condition, to include PTSD.


REMAND

In adjudicating a claim for service connection for PTSD, the 
Board is required to evaluate the supporting evidence in 
light of the places, types, and circumstances of service, as 
evidenced by the veteran's military records, and all 
pertinent medical and lay evidence.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b) 
(West 1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (1995); See Hayes v. Brown, 
5 Vet.App. 60, 66 (1993).  Additionally, service connection 
for PTSD requires medical evidence establishing a clear 
diagnosis of the condition, credible supporting evidence that 
the claimed inservice stressor actually occurred, and a link, 
established by the medical evidence, between current 
symptomatology and the claimed inservice stressor.  See 
Zarycki v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 91, 97 (1993).

Service personnel records indicate that the veteran served in 
Vietnam from August 1969 to July 1970, and received the usual 
medals associated with service in Vietnam.  The Board notes 
that the veteran has contended that he received the Purple 
Heart.  See VA Form 9, dated and received in May 1995.  
Service records also show that in August 1969, the veteran 
was assigned to Company B, 69/44th SigBn, and HHC (SigSpt) 
69th SigBn.  In March 1970, he was assigned to Radio & Cable 
Company, SigSptAgcy, Saigon.

A VA rating examination was conducted in November 1994.  At 
that time, testing was performed and diagnoses of PTSD and 
major depression were given.  However, it is noted in the 
testing report that the veteran had difficulty being specific 
about his combat experiences.  However, the test findings 
were consistent with PTSD symptoms.  In the test report 
summary, the examiner noted that there was some question 
regarding the validity of the magnitude of his combat 
experience, and attributed it to conceptual difficulties and 
possible mild thought disturbance rather than an attempt to 
exaggerate symptoms.  The Board notes that it does not appear 
that the claims folder was reviewed prior to the examination.  

In September 1996, the veteran was afforded a personal 
hearing.  At that hearing, the veteran and his spouse gave 
testimony regarding his years of treatment for psychiatric 
problems, as well as his combat-related stressors.  The 
veteran testified that in December 1969, his unit was pinned 
down for about seven hours, and he witnessed casualties as 
well as sustaining a shrapnel wound.  See September 1996 
hearing transcript at page 4.  The veteran provided the names 
of his fellow soldiers that were hurt or killed during that 
attack.  See September 1996 hearing transcript at pages 12-
16.  He testified that there were other incidents when his 
unit was under attack while in Long Bihn, Da Nang and Phu 
Bai.  See September 1996 hearing transcript at pages 17-19.  

In West v. Brown, 7 Vet.App. 70 (1994), the Court elaborated 
on the analysis in Zarycki.  In Zarycki, the Court held that 
in addition to demonstrating the existence of a stressor, the 
facts must also establish that the alleged stressful event 
was sufficient to give rise to PTSD.  Id. at 98-99.  In West, 
the Court held that the sufficiency of the stressor is a 
medical determination, and therefore adjudicators may not 
render a determination on this point in the absence of 
independent medical evidence.  Id. at 79.  The Court also 
held in West that a psychiatric examination for the purpose 
of establishing the existence of PTSD was inadequate for 
rating purposes because the examiners relied, in part, on 
events whose existence the Board had rejected.  Id. at 78.

Upon reviewing Zarycki and West, it appears that in 
approaching a claim for service connection for PTSD, the 
question of the existence of an event claimed as a 
recognizable stressor must be resolved by adjudicatory 
personnel.  If the adjudicators conclude that the record 
establishes the existence of such a stressor or stressors, 
then and only then, the case should be referred for a medical 
examination to determine the sufficiency of the stressor and 
whether the remaining elements required to support the 
diagnosis of PTSD have been met.  In such a referral, the 
adjudicators should specify to the examiner(s) precisely what 
stressors have been accepted as established by the record, 
and the medical examiners must be instructed that only those 
events may be considered in determining whether stressors to 
which the veteran was exposed during service were of 
sufficient severity as to have resulted in current 
psychiatric symptoms.  In other words, if the adjudicators 
determine that the existence of an alleged stressor or 
stressors in service is not established by the record, a 
medical examination to determine whether PTSD due to service 
is present is pointless.  Likewise, if the examiners render a 
diagnosis of PTSD that is not clearly based upon stressors in 
service whose existence the adjudicators have accepted, the 
examination would be inadequate for rating purposes.

It is the Board's judgment that there is the need for 
additional development which might confirm the existence of 
the veteran's combat experience, if any, or corroborate the 
veteran's description of stressor events during that service.  
See West v. Brown, 7 Vet.App. 70 (1994). 

The Board notes that there is the need to secure additional 
medical records.  In his notice of disagreement, dated 
January 1995, the veteran provided a list of places and dates 
where he received psychiatric treatment since the 1970’s.  
However, those records are not associated with the claims 
folder.  The only medical evidence of record are the 
veteran’s VA treatment reports from March 1971 and a VA 
hospitalization report from March 1990.  The medical evidence 
also includes an assessment report used by an administrative 
law judge, to grant Social Security Administration (SSA) 
disability benefits in 1994.  However, the records used to 
make that determination are not associated with the file. 

Therefore, the case is REMANDED for the following actions:

1.  The RO should obtain the medical 
records the veteran listed on his January 
1995 notice of disagreement.  The RO 
should also obtain from the SSA the 
records pertinent to the veteran’s claim 
for Social Security disability benefits 
or SSI as well as the medical records 
relied upon concerning that claim.  
Private medical records should be secured 
upon the proper release.  All records 
obtained should then be associated with 
the claims folder. 

2. The RO should provide information 
regarding the veteran’s claimed 
stressors, including the wounding of 
Jerry Walton, Ronnie Church, and Jerry 
Archibald, and other combat experiences, 
as described in the hearing of September 
1996, along with a copy of the veteran's 
DD Form 214, and any other relevant 
documentation, to the United States Army 
and Joint Services Environmental Support 
Group (ESG), 7798 Cissna Road, 
Springfield, Virginia 22150, for the 
purpose of verifying any of the stressors 
reported by the veteran.

3.  Following the above, the RO must make 
specific determinations as to whether the 
veteran engaged in combat and as to the 
occurrence of the claimed stressors.  In 
rendering this determination, the 
attention of the RO is directed to the 
cases of Zarycki and West and the 
discussion above.  In any event, the RO 
must specifically render a finding as to 
whether the appellant "engaged in combat 
with the enemy."  If the RO determines 
that the record establishes the existence 
of a stressor or stressors, the RO must 
specify what stressor or stressors in 
service it has determined are established 
by the record. In reaching this 
determination, the RO should address any 
credibility questions raised by the 
record.

4.  If, and only if, the RO determines 
that the record establishes the existence 
of a stressor or stressors, then the RO 
should arrange for the veteran to be 
accorded an examination by a board of two 
VA psychiatrists, if available, who have 
not previously examined him to determine 
the diagnoses of all psychiatric 
disorders that are present.  The RO must 
specify for the examiners the stressor or 
stressors that it has determined are 
established by the record and the 
examiners must be instructed that only 
those events may be considered for the 
purpose of determining whether exposure 
to a stressor in service has resulted in 
current psychiatric symptoms and in 
determining whether the nature of the 
alleged event is of the quality required 
to produce PTSD.  The examination report 
should reflect review of pertinent 
material in the claims folder.  The 
examiners should integrate the previous 
psychiatric findings and diagnoses with 
current findings to obtain an accurate 
picture of the nature of the veteran's 
psychiatric status.  If the diagnosis of 
PTSD is deemed appropriate, the examiners 
should comment upon which event was of 
the quality required to support the 
diagnosis of PTSD and as to whether there 
is a link between the current 
symptomatology and one or more of the 
inservice stressors found to be 
established by the RO.  The report of 
examination should include the complete 
rationale for all opinions expressed.  
All necessary special studies or tests 
should be accomplished.  The claims 
folder must be made available to the 
examiners prior to the examination.

5.  The RO should then review the record 
and ensure that all the above actions 
have been completed.  When the RO is 
satisfied that the record is complete and 
the psychiatric examination is adequate 
for rating purposes, the claim should be 
readjudicated.  If the benefit sought is 
denied, a supplemental statement of the 
case should be issued which includes a 
summary of additional evidence submitted, 
any additional applicable laws and 
regulations, and the reasons for the 
decision.  The veteran and his 
representative should be afforded the 
applicable time to respond.

Thereafter, subject to current appellate procedures, the 
case should be returned to the Board for further appellate 
consideration, if appropriate.  The veteran need take no 
action until he is further informed.  The purpose of this 
REMAND is to obtain additional information and to afford the 
veteran due process of law. The Board intimates no opinion, 
either factual or legal, as to the ultimate conclusion 
warranted in this case.



		
	G. H. SHUFELT
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

The Board of Veterans' Appeals Administrative Procedures 
Improvement Act, Pub. L. No. 103-271, § 6, 108 Stat. 740, 741 
(1994), permits a proceeding instituted before the Board to 
be assigned to an individual member of the Board for a 
determination.  This proceeding has been assigned to an 
individual member of the Board.

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the 
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a 
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the 
Board on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) 
(1995).
- 2 -


