Citation NR: 9702655	
Decision Date: 01/29/97		Archive Date: 02/12/97

DOCKET NO.  92-14 596	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Louisville, 
Kentucky


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for psychiatric disability, 
including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	James D. Howes, Attorney


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

Nancy S. Kettelle, Counsel




REMAND

The veteran had active duty from November 1967 to November 
1969, July 1970 to July 1973, February 1976 to January 1978 
and from April 1978 to June 1980.  

This matter came to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) on 
appeal from rating decisions of the Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in Louisville, Kentucky.  
In January 1994, the Board remanded the case to the RO for 
consideration of evidence received at the Board.  After 
continuing its prior determination that new and material 
evidence had not been added to the record to reopen the claim 
of entitlement to service connection for psychiatric 
disability, including PTSD, the RO returned the case to the 
Board.  In a February 1995 decision, the Board determined 
that new and material evidence had been submitted sufficient 
to reopen the claim for entitlement to service connection for 
psychiatric disability, including PTSD.  The Board remanded 
the case to the RO for additional development, including 
obtaining information from the United States Army and Joint 
Service Environmental Support Group and providing the veteran 
with a VA psychiatric examination.  The Board specified that 
the RO was to review all evidence on a de novo basis and 
adjudicate the issue of entitlement to service connection for 
psychiatric disability, including PTSD.  The requested 
development was completed, and the RO denied the veteran’s 
claim on the merits.  The RO issued a Supplemental Statement 
of the Case (SSOC) in October 1996.  

The Board notes that the record includes an April 1987 Social 
Security Administration (SSA) decision in which it was found 
that medical evidence established that the veteran had severe 
alcoholism with intermittent problems with alcoholic 
hallucinosis, mixed personality disorder mostly involving 
paranoia and anti-social features, mild mental retardation 
and atypical anxiety disorder in recent years.  It was also 
found that the severity of the veteran’s mental impairments 
had precluded him from working for at least 12 consecutive 
months.  With his response to the October 1996 SSOC, the 
veteran submitted a copy of a February 1996 SSA letter 
regarding continuation of disability benefits and the 
determination that the veteran had health problems other than 
alcoholism that kept him from working.  The veteran has not 
submitted records relied upon by the SSA in making its recent 
decision, and it is the Board’s opinion that in light of 
Waddell v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 454, 457 (1993), an effort 
should be made to obtain these records.  Although the issue 
here is service connection, the SSA records may include 
information pertinent to the claim, and they should be 
obtained if possible.  

Accordingly, the case is REMANDED to the RO for the following 
actions:  

1.  The RO should contact the veteran, 
through his attorney, and request that 
the veteran identify the names, addresses 
and approximate dates of treatment for 
all health care providers, both VA and 
non-VA, from which he has received 
treatment or evaluation for any claimed 
psychiatric disability, including PTSD, 
since November 1995.  With any necessary 
authorization from the veteran, the RO 
should attempt to obtain and associate 
with the claims files any medical records 
identified by the veteran which have not 
been secured previously.  

2.  The RO should obtain from the SSA a 
copy of the decision continuing benefits 
for the veteran to which reference was 
made in its February 1996 letter to the 
veteran and should, in addition, obtain a 
copy of the entire record upon which the 
decision was based.  

3.  Thereafter, the RO should review the 
claims files and ensure that all 
development actions, including obtaining 
the cited SSA records, have been 
completed in full.  The RO should 
undertake any other indicated 
development, including additional 
psychiatric examination, if deemed 
appropriate.  Then, the RO should 
readjudicate entitlement to service 
connection for psychiatric disability, 
including PTSD.  

If the benefit sought on appeal is not granted to the 
veteran’s satisfaction, the RO should issue an SSOC, and the 
veteran and his attorney should be provided an opportunity to 
respond.  Thereafter, the case should be returned to the 
Board for further appellate consideration, if otherwise in 
order.  The Board intimates no opinion as to the ultimate 
outcome of this case.  The veteran need take no action until 
he is otherwise notified by the RO through his attorney.  



		
	SHANE A. DURKIN
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

The Board of Veterans' Appeals Administrative Procedures 
Improvement Act, Pub. L. No. 103-271, § 6, 108 Stat. 740, 741 
(1994), permits a proceeding instituted before the Board to 
be assigned to an individual member of the Board for a 
determination.  This proceeding has been assigned to an 
individual member of the Board.

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the 
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a 
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the 
Board on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) 
(1995).
- 2 -


