Citation NR: 9735754	
Decision Date: 10/23/97		Archive Date: 10/28/97
DOCKET NO.  96-15 235	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) 
Regional Office (RO) in Huntington, West Virginia


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disorder, 
to include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Disabled American Veterans


WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

John M. Clarkson, III, Associate Counsel

INTRODUCTION

The veteran had active service from January 1968 to August 
1969.  

Additional issues of entitlement to service connection for a 
skin disorder claimed as due to Agent Orange and entitlement 
to a compensable rating for bilateral hearing loss were 
certified on appeal to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals 
(Board), but were withdrawn by the veteran during a hearing 
in July 1997.  


REMAND

The appellant contends, in effect, that he has PTSD as a 
result of experiences in Vietnam.  The Board notes that in an 
August 1967 preinduction  examination report of medical 
history, the veteran indicated he had been rejected for 
military service for “mental” reasons.  It is unclear whether 
he was acknowledging preservice psychiatric problems; and it 
does not appear that any attempt has been made to clarify 
this. 

At a July 1997 hearing the veteran asserted that, while 
serving in Vietnam in August 1969, his unit (Company “B” of 
the 93rd Engineer Battalion (Construction)) came under enemy 
mortar attack at Dong Tam and Moc Hoa.  He testified that in 
July 1969, he saw a young girl killed when she was run over 
by a truck driven by a member of his unit.  

The most recent medical treatment records of the veteran date 
from 1995.  However, at the July 1997 hearing, he indicated 
that he had been receiving treatment for PTSD at the VA 
Medical Center (VAMC) in Huntington, West Virginia for the 
six to eight months preceding the hearing.  He also stated 
that prior to his treatment at the VAMC in Huntington, he 
received treatment for PTSD at the Logan-Mingo Mental Health 
Clinic in Chattaroy, West Virginia (Logan-Mingo MHC).  
Records of treatment for PTSD from the VAMC in Huntington and 
records of treatment at Logan-Mingo MHC after 1995 have not 
been associated with the claims folder.  

Additionally, while medical records of treatment of the 
veteran from Logan-Mingo MHC which are in the claims folder 
include a diagnosis of PTSD, reports of VA general medical 
and mental examinations from the VAMC in Huntington, do not 
include a diagnosis of PTSD, except by history.  Therefore, 
it is unclear whether the veteran has PTSD or another 
psychiatric disorder.  

VA has a duty to assist the veteran in the development of 
facts pertinent to his claim.  38 U.S.C.A. § 5107(a) (West 
1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(a) (1996).  The U.S. Court of 
Veterans Appeals (Court) has held that the duty to assist the 
veteran in obtaining and developing available facts and 
evidence to support his claim includes obtaining medical 
records to which the veteran has referred and obtaining 
adequate VA examinations.  The Court has also stated that the 
Board must make a determination as to the adequacy of the 
record.  Littke v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 90 (1990).  
Fulfillment of the statutory duty to assist includes the 
conduct of a thorough and contemporaneous medical 
examination, one which takes into account the records of 
prior medical treatment, so that the evaluation of the 
claimed disability will be a fully informed one.  Green v. 
Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 121 (1991).  

The Board finds that additional development of the evidence 
is required.  Accordingly, the case is REMANDED to the RO for 
the following:

1.  The veteran should be asked to 
provide detailed information as to 
whether and where he received treatment 
for any mental disorder(s) both prior to 
service and since 1995.  The RO should 
obtain complete clinical records of all 
such treatment.  

2.  The RO should contact the Director, 
National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA), attn: NCPMA-O, 
9700 Page Boulevard, St. Louis, Missouri 
63132, and request morning reports for 
the veteran’s unit: Company “B,” 93rd 
Engineer Battalion (Construction), from 
July to August 1969, to determine whether 
there are any references to the unit 
coming under enemy mortar fire at Dong 
Tam and/or Moc Hoa and whether a young 
civilian girl was a casualty as a result 
of a truck-driving accident involving a 
member of the unit.  

3.  When the above-requested development 
is completed, the veteran should be 
afforded a VA psychiatric examination to 
determine whether he has PTSD based on a 
verified stressor and/or the nature and 
etiology of any other psychiatric 
disorder he may have. If PTSD is 
diagnosed, the examiner must specifically 
state for the record the stressors relied 
upon to support the diagnosis.  The 
claims folder must be available to the 
examiner for review in conjunction with 
the examination.  

4.  The RO should then review the 
veteran’s claim to determine whether it 
may be granted.  If it remains denied, 
the veteran and his representative should 
be furnished an appropriate Supplemental 
Statement of the Case and given a 
reasonable opportunity to respond.  

Thereafter, the case should be returned to the Board for 
further appellate review, if appropriate.  The veteran need 
take no further action until he is notified.

This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment by the RO.  
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the 
Board of Veterans’ Appeals or by the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals for additional development or other 
appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.  
See The Veterans’ Benefits Improvements Act of 1994, Pub. L. 
No. 103-446, § 302, 108 Stat. 4645, 4658 (1994), 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 5101 (West Supp. 1997) (Historical and Statutory Notes).  
In addition, VBA’s ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE MANUAL, M21-1, Part 
IV, directs the ROs to provide expeditious handling of all 
cases that have been remanded by the Board and the Court.  
See M21-1, Part IV, paras. 8.44-8.45 and 38.02-38.03.



		
	GEORGE R. SENYK
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the 
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a 
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the 
Board on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) 
(1996).
- 2 -


