Citation NR: 9735294	
Decision Date: 10/20/97		Archive Date: 10/24/97
DOCKET NO.  96-30 828	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Seattle, 
Washington


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Veterans of Foreign Wars of 
the United States


WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

Michael J. Skaltsounis, Associate Counsel



INTRODUCTION

The veteran had active service from March 1970 to November 
1971.


CONTENTIONS OF APPELLANT ON APPEAL

In his substantive appeal, dated in July 1996, the veteran 
notes that he received the Bronze Star Medal and the Vietnam 
Service Medal with one Bronze Service Star.  He further 
requests that there should be additional investigation with 
respect to the disappearance of his close friend during 
combat action his unit was involved in while in Vietnam.


DECISION OF THE BOARD

The Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board), in accordance with 
the provisions of 38 U.S.C.A. § 7104 (West 1991 & Supp. 
1997), has reviewed and considered all of the evidence and 
material of record in the veteran's claims file.  Based on 
its review of the relevant evidence in this matter, and for 
the following reasons and bases, it is the decision of the 
Board that the veteran has not submitted evidence of a well 
grounded claim.


FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  PTSD was not present in service or manifest within one 
year thereafter, and there is no evidence of PTSD causally 
linked to service.

2.  There is no clear diagnosis of PTSD of record.

3.  The veteran had verified active service from March 1970 
to November 1971; he received no awards or decorations 
denoting that he “engaged in combat with the enemy.”

4.  The veteran has reported alleged stressors in service; 
service records or other credible supporting evidence does 
not verify any of the claimed stressors; he did not “engage 
in combat with the enemy.”


CONCLUSION OF LAW

The claim for service connection for PTSD is not well 
grounded.  38 U.S.C.A. § 5107(a) (West 1991).


REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

I.  Background

Service connection may be established for a disability 
resulting from disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by 
active service.  38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 1131 (West 1991 & Supp. 
1997).  For the showing of chronic disease in service there 
is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to 
identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to 
establish chronicity at the time.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(b) 
(1996).  If chronicity in service is not established, a 
showing of continuity of symptoms after discharge is required 
to support the claim.  Id.  Service connection may be granted 
for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the 
evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in 
service.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).

For the purposes of section 1110 of this title, and subject 
to the provisions of section 1113 of this title, in the case 
of any veteran who served for ninety days or more during a 
period of war and a chronic disease, including a psychosis, 
becomes manifest to a degree of ten percent or more within 
one year from the date of separation from such service, such 
disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in or 
aggravated by such service notwithstanding there is no record 
of evidence of such disease during the period of service.  38 
U.S.C.A. § 1112 (West 1991).  Where there is affirmative 
evidence to the contrary, or evidence to establish that an 
intercurrent injury or disease which is a recognized cause of 
any of the diseases within the purview of section 1112 of 
this title, has been suffered between the date of separation 
from service and the date of onset of any such diseases, or 
the disability is due to the veteran’s own willful 
misconduct, service connection pursuant to section 1112 will 
not be in order.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1113 (West 1991).  The 
provisions of section 1112 are applicable in the case of any 
veteran who served in the active military, naval, or air 
service after December 31, 1946.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1137 (West 
1991).

Congenital or developmental defects such as personality 
disorders are not diseases or injuries within the meaning of 
the applicable legislation.  38 C.F.R. § 3.303(c).

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence 
establishing a clear diagnosis of the condition, credible 
supporting evidence that the claimed inservice stressor 
actually occurred, and a link, established by medical 
evidence, between current symptomatology and the claimed 
inservice stressor.  If the claimed stressor is related to 
combat, service department evidence that the veteran engaged 
in combat or that the veteran was awarded the Purple Heart, 
Combat Infantryman Badge, or similar combat citation will be 
accepted, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, as 
conclusive evidence of a claimed inservice stressor.  
38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (1996).

The threshold question that must be resolved with regard to a 
claim is whether the veteran has presented evidence that the 
claim is well grounded.  38 U.S.C.A. § 5107(a) (West 1991); 
Murphy v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 78, 81 (1990).  A well 
grounded claim is a plausible claim, that is a claim which is 
meritorious on its own or capable of substantiation.  Murphy, 
1 Vet. App. at 81.  Mere allegations in support of a claim 
that a disorder should be service-connected are not 
sufficient; the veteran must submit evidence in support of 
the claim that would “justify a belief by a fair and 
impartial individual that the claim is plausible.”  
38 U.S.C.A. § 5107(a); Tirpak v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 609, 
611 (1992).  The quality and quantity of the evidence 
required to meet this statutory burden depends upon the issue 
presented by the claim.  Grottveit v. Brown, 5 Vet. App. 91, 
92-93 (1993).  

The United States Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) has held 
that the basic elements of a well grounded claim for service 
connection and the type of evidence required to meet each 
element are as follows:

(1)  Competent evidence of current disability (medical 
diagnosis); Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 144 
(1992); Brammer v. Derwinski, 3 Vet. App. 223, 225 (1992);
(2)  Evidence of incurrence or aggravation of disease or 
injury in service (lay or medical evidence); Cartwright v. 
Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 24, 25 (1991); Layno v. Brown, 6 Vet. 
App. 465 (1994); and
(3)  Evidence of a nexus between the in-service injury or 
disease and the current disability (Medical evidence or 
presumption that certain disabilities manifest within certain 
periods are related to service); Grottveit v. Brown, 5 Vet. 
App. 91, 93; Lathan v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 359 (1995).

Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498, 506 (1995).

The Court has further held that a lay person is not competent 
to make a medical diagnosis or to relate a medical disorder 
to a specific cause.  See Espiritu v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 
492, 494 (1992).  Therefore, if the issue is one of medical 
etiology or a medical diagnosis, competent medical evidence 
must be submitted to make the claim well-grounded.  See 
Grottveit at 93.

If the veteran fails to submit a well grounded claim, the 
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is under no duty to 
assist in any further development of the claim.  Id.  
Furthermore, a claim that is not well grounded must be 
denied.

The Court in Zarycki v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 91 (1993) set 
forth the foundation for the framework now established by the 
case law for establishing the presence of a recognizable 
stressor, which is the essential prerequisite to support the 
diagnosis of PTSD.  The Court noted that the evidence 
necessary to establish the existence of the recognizable 
stressor during service will vary depending on whether or not 
the veteran was “engaged in combat with the enemy” under 
38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b) (West 1991) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 
(1996).  Whether or not a veteran "engaged in combat with the 
enemy" must be determined through recognized military 
citations or other service department evidence.  In other 
words, the claimant's bare assertions that he "engaged in 
combat with the enemy" are not sufficient, by themselves, to 
establish this fact.  The record must first contain 
recognized military citations or other supportive evidence to 
establish that he "engaged in combat with the enemy."  If the 
determination with respect to this step is affirmative, then 
(and only then), a second step requires that the veteran's 
lay testimony regarding claimed stressors must be accepted as 
conclusive as to their actual occurrence and no further 
development or corroborative evidence will be required, 
provided that the veteran's testimony is found to be 
"satisfactory," e.g., credible, and "consistent with the 
circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such service."  
Zarycki at 98 (emphasis added).

In an elaboration and clarification of Zarycki, the Court 
noted in Moreau v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 389 (1996), that 
38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(1996) requires three elements to support 
an award of service connection for PTSD:  (1) a current 
medical diagnosis of PTSD; (2) medical evidence of a causal 
nexus between current symptomatology and the claimed in-
service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that 
the claimed in service stressor occurred.  The Court pointed 
out that since Zarycki, as well as Doran v. Brown, 6 Vet. 
App. 283 (1994) and West v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 70 (1994), 
changes in VA ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE MANUAL M21-1 [hereafter 
MANUAL M-21-1] had rendered certain portions of those 
decisions no longer operative insofar as they were grounded 
in subsequently revised manual provisions.  Further, the 
Court had held in Dizoglio v. Brown, 9 Vet. App. 163, 166 
(1996) as a matter of law that “if the claimed stressor is 
not combat-related, [the] appellants lay testimony regarding 
the in-service stressors is insufficient to establish the 
occurrence of the stressor.”

In Moreau, the Court, citing the MANUAL M21-1 Part VA,  
7.46.c (Oct. 11, 1995) held that “credible supporting 
evidence” of a noncombat stressor “may be obtained from” 
service records or “other sources.”   The Court, however, 
also held that while the MANUAL M21-1 provisions did not 
expressly state whether the veteran’s testimony standing 
alone could constitute credible evidence of the actual 
occurrence of a noncombat stressor, the Court’s holding in 
Dizoglio mandated that the veteran’s testimony by itself 
could not constitute “credible supporting evidence” of the 
actual existence of the noncombat stressor.  Further, the 
Court held in Moreau, the fact that a medical opinion was 
provided relating PTSD to events the veteran described in 
service could not constitute “credible supporting evidence” 
of the existence of the claimed noncombat stressor.

In West v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 70 (1994), the Court further 
elaborated on an essential element in establishing the 
adequacy of the verified event (stressor) to produce PTSD.  
In Zarycki, the Court held that in addition to demonstrating 
the existence of a stressor, the facts must also establish 
that the alleged stressful event was sufficient to give rise 
to PTSD.  Id. at 98-99.  In West, the Court held that the 
sufficiency of the stressor is a medical determination, and 
therefore adjudicators may not render a determination on this 
point in the absence of independent medical evidence.  The 
Court also held in West that a psychiatric examination for 
the purpose of establishing the existence of PTSD was 
inadequate for rating purposes because the examiners relied, 
in part, on events whose existence the Board had rejected.

In Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 (1997), the Court noted 
that the VA had adopted a final rule in October 1996, 
effective November 7, 1996, revising 38 C.F.R. §§ 4.125 and 
4.126 (1996).  The effect of these revisions was to change 
the diagnostic criteria for mental disorders from the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM), 
third edition and the third edition, revised, to the fourth 
edition (DSM-IV).  The Court found that DSM-IV altered the 
criteria for assessing the adequacy of the stressor from an 
objective to a subjective basis.  The Court further found 
that where there was “undisputed, unequivocal” diagnoses of 
PTSD of record, and the Board did not make a finding that the 
reports were incomplete, the adequacy of the stressor had to 
be presumed as a matter of law.  The Court noted that 
“although it is not necessary to its decision here,” the 
diagnoses of PTSD appeared to comport with the diagnostic 
criteria for PTSD.  Id. at 144.  (The concurring opinion goes 
further and states that the case also holds that where there 
is an “unequivocal” diagnosis of PTSD, the adequacy of the 
symptoms to support the diagnosis, as well as the sufficiency 
of the stressor, are presumed.  Id. at 153) The governing 
regulation provides that if the Board, or other adjudicators, 
doubts whether the diagnosis of a mental disorder is 
substantiated, including as to whether the diagnostic 
criteria are met, or indeed rejects the diagnosis shown on 
examination, the case should be returned to the examiner for 
clarification.  38 C.F.R. § 4.126 (1996).

The Board finds that, upon review of Zarycki, Moreau, West, 
and Cohen it is clear that, in approaching a claim for 
service connection for PTSD, the question of the existence 
and character of an event claimed as a recognizable stressor 
is a matter solely within the providence of adjudicatory 
personnel.  If the adjudicators, having given due 
consideration to all matters of credibility raised by the 
record, conclude that the record establishes the existence 
and character of such an alleged stressor or stressors, then 
and only then, the resolution of a claim for service 
connection for PTSD moves forward to the questions of whether 
the event (or events) was sufficient to constitute a stressor 
for purposes of causing PTSD, and whether the remaining 
elements required to support the diagnosis of PTSD have been 
met.  The adequacy of the event claimed as a stressor and the 
question of whether the diagnostic criteria for PTSD have 
been met are matters that require the input of competent 
medical evidence.

The Board further notes that under Collette v. Brown, 82 F.3d 
389 (Fed.Cir. 1996) and Caluza v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 498 
(1995), the correct application of 38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b) 
requires a three-step, sequential analysis:

(1)  Has the claimant produced “satisfactory lay or other 
evidence of such injury or disease.”  “Satisfactory evidence” 
is defined as “credible evidence that would a allow a 
reasonable fact finder to conclude that the alleged injury or 
disease was incurred in or aggravated by the veteran’s combat 
service.”
(2)  Is the proffered evidence “consistent with the 
circumstances, conditions, or hardships of such service.”  
(3)  Once these the first two steps are met, the Secretary 
“shall accept” the veteran’s evidence as “sufficient proof of 
service connection,” even if no official record of such 
incurrence exists, unless the government can met the burden 
of showing “clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.”  

In Collette, it was expressly held that during the first two 
steps of this sequential analysis, the credibility 
determination must be made as to the veteran’s evidence 
standing alone, not weighing the veteran’s evidence with 
contrary evidence.  Only in the third step may contrary 
evidence, such as a Report of Medical Examination at 
Separation, be brought into play.  Collette, 82 F.3d at 393.

Ultimately, the Board finds that the critical issues with 
respect to the veteran’s claim for service connection for 
PTSD in this appeal involve the questions of whether there is 
medical evidence of a clear diagnosis of PTSD and whether the 
veteran “engaged in combat with the enemy” or there is 
“credible supporting evidence” of the occurrence of alleged 
in-service stressor(s).  Accordingly, the Board will address 
the evidence related to these questions and then analyze that 
evidence.  In setting forth that evidence, the Board will set 
out the record primarily with respect to areas that bear upon 
the existence of a diagnosis of PTSD and the alleged in-
service stressor.

The veteran’s personnel file reflects that after his initial 
basic training, the veteran was assigned as a cannoneer to 
Battery B, 5th Battalion, 4th Artillery in the 1st Brigade of 
the 5th Infantry Division, Mechanized.  The personnel records 
further indicate that the veteran was awarded the Bronze Star 
Medal following service in Vietnam.  The veteran’s DD 214 
shows active service from March 1970 to November 1971, and 
indicates that the veteran had 10 months, and 27 days of 
foreign and/or sea service, and shows awards of the National 
Defense Service Medal, Vietnam Service Medal with one Bronze 
Service Star, Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal, Bronze Star 
Medal, and Marksman citation for the M-16 rifle.  He has no 
awards or decorations specific to combat, appropriate to his 
branch of service.

None of the veteran’s service records discloses any reference 
to an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, by 
complaints, statements of medical history or clinical 
findings.  At the separation medical examination in October 
1971, no history of an in-service psychiatric disorder was 
recorded, and there were no findings at that time associated 
with psychiatric examination.

In his original application for compensation or pension in 
December 1972, the veteran did not make a claim for service 
connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, and in a 
subsequent application in August 1975, the veteran sought 
service connection for bilateral hearing loss.  Moreover, at 
his VA medical examination in November 1975, the veteran did 
not relate complaints with respect to any psychiatric 
disorder and no service stressors were identified.

The first medical evidence which notes that the veteran had 
reportedly been exposed to stressful experiences in service 
is a private disability evaluation report from Dr. E. F. W., 
dated in October 1994, which reflects that the veteran had a 
history of alcoholism and lead toxicity, and that he was a 13 
month Vietnam front-line combat veteran.  The veteran further 
reported that he experienced constant combat duty during his 
13 months in Vietnam, and that during this period he became 
socially withdrawn and developed a hearing loss.  At point-
blank range, he was sometimes required to fire “flechette” 
rounds at enemy troops which were extremely destructive.  He 
was also sometimes placed on graves detail, which involved 
the retrieval of both friendly and enemy soldiers following 
combat.  When he returned home after Vietnam, the veteran was 
quite withdrawn.  He initially worked for several timber 
companies and as a lead salvage specialist from 1980 to 1992.

Mental status examination at this time revealed that that his 
mood varied form unremarkable to mildly sad.  There was no 
evidence of hallucinations or delusions of grandeur, and the 
veteran denied unwanted thoughts or sleep difficulty.  The 
veteran’s first intoxication occurred during military 
service, and he had been treated at the VA Hospital in Walla 
Walla, Washington in 1992 for both substance abuse and lead 
toxicity.  The examiner noted that certain test results 
reflected that the veteran had a valid profile but that there 
was a negative impression management style.  The diagnostic 
impression under DSM-IV included the ruling out of chronic 
PTSD.

A January 1995 VA social and industrial survey report 
indicates that the veteran reported a history of nightmares 
at the rate of about one a month, and that he experienced 
thoughts of Vietnam approximately twice a week.  He related 
being on grave duty in Vietnam, at which time he collected 
bodies and body parts and placed them into plastic bags.  
Loud noise and other circumstances will irritate him or 
trigger thought of Vietnam.  The veteran reported that he had 
positive working relationships with his peers and superiors.  
In Vietnam, the veteran reported that he was a cannoneer with 
the “54th” Artillery, B Battery, and that it was his 
responsibility to load/unload, clean fuses, set fuses, hump 
powder, and fill in for whatever needed to be done.  He was 
exposed to mortar and rocket fire, sniper fire while on grave 
duty, booby traps, and witnessed the killing of three friends 
by booby traps in which the veteran had the responsibility of 
recovering body fragments.  The veteran reported that he 
participated in grave detail around the perimeter about twice 
a week, and that the bodies were often found in a state of 
decomposition.

The assessment was that the veteran had been subject to 
significant war zone related traumatic experiences, and that 
he had limited insight as to how these had affected his 
adjustment to civilian life.  It was further noted that the 
veteran had presented some PTSD related issues that included 
intrusive thinking, but denied sleep related problems, and 
had only occasional nightmares.  

A January 1995 VA PTSD examination revealed that the veteran 
reported that he lived by himself in a 20 foot trailer, and 
denied any psychological or psychiatric problems.  He further 
reported that in Vietnam, he was exposed to artillery and 
shrapnel which was very traumatic for him.  He described 
having nightmares once every three or four months.  Mental 
status examination revealed that the veteran was cooperative 
and was quite content with his life as it had developed.  The 
veteran reported that he gets along with others, and that he 
had intrusive memories about Vietnam.  The diagnostic 
impression included a possibility of PTSD with obvious 
underlying problems such as alcoholism in the past.  The 
examiner went on to note that psychosocial stressors had been 
accumulating through the years, starting with dehumanizing 
experiences in Vietnam, exposure to high noise during combat, 
exposure to lead with subsequent lead poisoning, multiple 
concussions, and alcohol exposure.  The examiner further 
noted that the veteran had a history of moderately severe 
psychosocial stressors since his military years, and that 
although the possibility of mild PTSD was also a 
consideration, the veteran had been able to repress it quite 
effectively through the years.  A Global Assessment of 
Function scale (GAF) code of 45 was assigned which the 
examiner noted to be considerable.

A May 1995 letter from the regional office (RO) to the 
veteran requested additional information regarding the 
veteran’s claimed stressors, and a copy was also furnished to 
the veteran’s service representative.  The appellant did not 
respond to this request.

At the veteran’s personal hearing in January 1997, the 
veteran testified that in Vietnam, he was involved in the 
operation of “155 Howertzer’s” which were mounted on tracks 
(transcript (T.) at pp. 2-3).  There were a couple of times 
that his battalion was hit on the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and the 
veteran’s unit sustained casualties, which included a friend 
by the name of Jack Dunce (T. at pp. 3-4).  The veteran 
acknowledged that there was no record of the veteran’s friend 
missing in action and that the veteran was awarded the Bronze 
Star Medal for the period in which his unit received mortar 
rounds on the Ho Chi Minh Trail (T. at p. 4).  The veteran 
stated that of the six guns in his battery, only one was 
destroyed, and that was the one his friend was in when he was 
killed in action (T. at p. 5).  The veteran noted that a Dr. 
W. had examined him in 1994 and reached certain diagnoses (T. 
at p. 6).  In 1992, the veteran had received some treatment 
for alcoholism from the VA Hospital in Walla, Walla, 
Washington (T. at p. 6).  Watching TV will sometimes trigger 
memories of Vietnam (T. at p. 7).  

An April 1997 VA PTSD examination revealed that the veteran 
reported that he was sleeping satisfactorily and did not 
experience nightmares.  The veteran reportedly saw combat in 
Vietnam as an artillery gunner and cannoneer, and experienced 
incoming mortars and other rocket attack, from which there 
were casualties.  Some of the more traumatic experiences were 
noted to involve the veteran’s role with the “54th” Artillery 
on the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos.  The examiner noted the 
veteran’s receipt of Vietnam ribbons and the Bronze Star.  
Every once in a while the veteran would day dream presumably 
about his combat exposure.  The diagnosis included alcohol 
dependence, now in sound remission, and dementia related to 
lead poisoning, but no PTSD.  The examiner went on to comment 
that despite the veteran’s reported exposure to sustained 
combat, including rocket attacks and mortars, there was not 
much information supportive of a PTSD disability.  If the 
veteran exhibited PTSD, the examiner believed that it was not 
disabling or prominent in the veteran’s ongoing existence.  
The examiner concluded that while the veteran may be disabled 
by lead poisoning and dementia, disability 
directly/exclusively related to PTSD was not supported by the 
interview or other material made available to the examiner at 
the time of this examination.

An August 1997 letter from the RO to the veteran notified the 
veteran that he could still submit additional evidence in 
support of his claim on appeal.

The record shows that the RO advised the veteran explicitly 
that Jack Dunce did not appear on the list of service members 
killed in Vietnam.


II.  Analysis

Clear Diagnosis of PTSD

The Board has considered the evidence relevant to this claim, 
and first notes that the record shows that the veteran did 
not have an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, 
in service, at the time of his terminal service medical 
examination, nor was it manifest to any degree within one 
year of separation from service.   Moreover, the existence of 
an acquired psychiatric disorder for which compensation 
benefits are provided, to include a diagnosis of  PTSD 
meeting the regulatory criteria, has not been shown by 
competent, i.e., medical, evidence at any time.  See Espiritu 
v. Derwinski, supra.  

With respect specifically to a claim for service connection 
for PTSD, the controlling regulation requires medical 
evidence establishing a clear diagnosis of the condition and 
credible supporting evidence that the claimed inservice 
stressor actually occurred, and a link, established by 
medical evidence, between current symptomatology and the 
claimed inservice stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (1996).  In 
this case, several examiners suggest possible PTSD or that 
the diagnosis of PTSD must be ruled out.  None of them, 
however, rendered a “clear diagnosis.”  Moreover, the RO 
expressly requested a VA psychiatric examination to address 
whether a clear diagnosis of PTSD was obtainable.  That 
examiner determined that PTSD was not currently present.  
Thus, one element of a well grounded claim, competent 
evidence of current disability (medical diagnosis), is 
lacking here.  Rabideau v. Derwinski, supra; Brammer v. 
Derwinski, supra.  Moreover, the record fails to reflect a 
clear diagnosis of PTSD such as required to meet the 
requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).

Stressor(s) in Service 

With respect to the issue of the existence of verified in-
service stressors, the Board notes that the veteran served in 
the United States Army from March 1970 to November 1971.  
Service records indicate that he received the National 
Defense Service Medal, Vietnam Service Medal with one Bronze 
Service Star, Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal, Bronze Star 
Medal, and Marksman citation for the M-16 rifle.  There is 
nothing in the record that indicates that the veteran’s 
performance of his assigned duties was less than highly 
satisfactory, and nothing in this decision is intended to 
challenge the quality of the service rendered.

This matter, however, does not turn on the general 
proposition that the appellant satisfactorily performed his 
assigned duties in service, including any duties carried out 
in Vietnam.  This is a specific claim for PTSD and, as such, 
requires not a general passing on overall performance of 
assigned duties, but an explicit scrutiny of all the events 
in service, including those in Southeast Asia, that are now 
claimed as “stressors.”  The starting point for any 
determination with regard to PTSD is one or more “stressors.”  
Under the controlling regulation, there must be credible 
supporting evidence that the claimed service stressor 
actually occurred.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).  The existence of a 
an event alleged as a “stressor” that results in PTSD, though 
not the adequacy of the alleged event to cause PTSD, is an 
adjudicative, not a medical determination.  Zarycki v. Brown, 
6 Vet. App. 91 (1993).

(a)  “Conclusive Evidence” (Presumptive Corroboration) of an 
Alleged Combat Stressor

Under the framework established in Zarycki, the Board must 
make an explicit determination as to whether the appellant 
“engaged in combat with the enemy.”  This in turn requires as 
a preliminary matter examination of whether the record 
already contains “conclusive evidence” that he “engaged in 
combat with the enemy.”  By rule making, the VA has set 
forward criteria of “conclusive evidence” to establish a 
combat related stressor.  These criteria are defined as: (a) 
a claim that the stressor is related to combat and (b) a 
demonstration in the record that the claimant (“in the 
absence of evidence to the contrary”) has been awarded 
certain specific recognized awards or decorations identified 
in 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) or VA ADJUDICATION MANUAL M21-1, Part 
VI,  7.46 (effective Oct. 11. 1995).  The Board notes the 
revised version of this Manual M21-1 provision (Part VI,  
11.37 (effective Feb. 13, 1997) did  not alter the list of 
awards or decorations.  These include certain awards 
specifically denoting combat participation (the Combat 
Infantryman Badge and the Combat Action Ribbon), a decoration 
awarded for combat incurred wounds (the Purple Heart Medal), 
and certain decorations that are awarded only for valor in 
combat with the enemy.  The record clearly establishes that 
the claimant was not authorized any of these awards or 
decorations.

In addition to the criteria based upon certain awards or 
decorations, “conclusive evidence” may also be established by 
“other supportive evidence” that the claimant was a prisoner 
of war under the requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(y), or 
evidence that the claimant was in a plane crash, ship 
sinking, explosion, rape or assault, or duty on a burn ward 
or in a graves registration unit.  The Board finds the term 
“other supportive evidence” is unclear as to the limitations, 
if any, on what can constitute “other supportive evidence.”  
At a minimum, the case law from the Court, noted below, would 
preclude the use of the claimant’s own assertions as “other 
supporting evidence,” nor would post-service medical evidence 
suffice as “other supporting evidence.”  To the extent that 
the term “other supporting evidence” in this context could be 
service department records, the Board finds that there are no 
service department medical or administrative records to 
establish that the claimant was a prisoner of war under the 
requirements of 38 C.F.R. § 3.1(y), or he was in a plane 
crash, ship sinking, explosion, rape or assault, or duty on a 
burn ward or in a graves registration unit.  

Thus, the Board finds that the record does not contain 
“conclusive evidence” that he “engaged in combat with the 
enemy” and is therefore entitled to have his lay statements 
accepted without need of further corroboration.  To the 
extent that “other supportive evidence” could be other than 
service department records to establish any of the events 
listed under “conclusive evidence,” this matter is addressed 
further below.

(b)  “Credible Supporting Evidence” of a Claimed “Stressor”

Where the record does not reflect “conclusive evidence” that 
the claimant “engaged in combat with the enemy” under 
38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b), his assertions, standing alone, can 
not as a matter of law provide evidence to establish that he 
“engaged in combat with the enemy” or that an event claimed 
as a stressor occurred.  Dizoglio, 9 Vet. App. 163 (1996).  
Furthermore, as a matter of law, “credible supporting 
evidence that the claimed in[-]service event actually 
occurred” can not be provided by medical opinion based on 
post-service examination.  Moreau, 9 Vet. App. 394-96.  This 
does not mean that the claimant can not still establish that 
he “engaged in combat with the enemy,” and then secure the 
presumptions provided under 38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b).  It only 
means that other “credible supporting evidence from any 
source” must be provided that the event alleged as the 
stressor in service occurred.  Cohen, 10 Vet. App. at 147.  
Thus, the analysis of stressor verification is not so much 
bisected by whether the event is “combat” or “noncombat,” but 
whether there is “conclusive evidence” of a combat stressor, 
or “credible supporting evidence from any source” of a combat 
or noncombat stressor.  

The first step in sorting out the evidence at this point is 
to identify what the record establishes about the units the 
claimant was assigned to and where those units were in 
Southeast Asia.  Based on the claimant’s service 
administrative records, the Board finds that the veteran unit 
was, in fact, involved in providing artillery support in 
Vietnam.  The Board notes, however, that there is no service 
department record linking the veteran directly to an event 
involving unit casualties or destruction of unit vehicles or 
equipment due to enemy fire.

Among the accounts the appellant has presented as events 
purported as “stressors,” are the following:

Seeing combat and comrades killed in action
Being under fire
Exposure to booby traps
Grave detail
Exposure to sniper fire

As was noted above, in light of the fact that none of the 
veteran’s purported stressors had been verified by service 
records or otherwise, the RO sent a letter to the veteran in 
which more details were requested, and a copy of the RO’s 
letter was also furnished to the veteran’s service 
representative.  The record contains no response from the 
veteran or his service representative to the correspondence 
from the RO.  Moreover, the record in this case shows that 
the one event that could be tested against supporting 
evidence, the death of a specifically named comrade in 
service, resulted in the conclusion that the evidence refuted 
the veteran’s allegation.  As the Court has pointed out, at a 
minimum, the available service records must not contradict 
allegations of events in service.  Doran v. Brown, 6 Vet. 
App. 283 (1994).  The Board finds this analysis would apply 
as well to closely comparable evidence, such as evidence as 
to the names of service members killed in Vietnam. 

The Board finds that as the record stands, none of the above 
events are corroborated by “satisfactory evidence.”  While 
the Board notes that the RO most recently denied the 
veteran’s claim in a supplemental statement of the case in 
which it applied the criteria of DSM-III instead of DSM-IV, 
in view of the Board’s finding of the lack of credible 
supporting evidence from any source verifying any event 
claimed as a stressor in this matter, the impact of the RO’s 
failure to consider the criteria of DSM-IV is rendered moot.




ORDER

The claim for service connection for PTSD is denied as not 
well grounded.



		
	RICHARD B. FRANK
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

NOTICE OF APPELLATE RIGHTS:  Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7266 (West 
1991 &  Supp. 1997), a decision of the Board of Veterans' 
Appeals granting less than the complete benefit, or benefits, 
sought on appeal is appealable to the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals within 120 days from the date of mailing of 
notice of the decision, provided that a Notice of 
Disagreement concerning an issue which was before the Board 
was filed with the agency of original jurisdiction on or 
after November 18, 1988.  Veterans' Judicial Review Act, 
Pub. L. No. 100-687, § 402, 102 Stat. 4105, 4122 (1988).  The 
date which appears on the face of this decision constitutes 
the date of mailing and the copy of this decision which you 
have received is your notice of the action taken on your 
appeal by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.


- 2 -


