Citation NR: 9737618	
Decision Date: 11/10/97		Archive Date: 11/19/97
DOCKET NO.  95-20 832	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in 
Newark, New Jersey


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Disabled American Veterans


WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

D. F. Chiappetta, Jr., Associate Counsel



INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty with the Army from March 
1964 to March 1966, including service in Vietnam from August 
1965 to February 1966.

This case comes before the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) 
on appeal from an April 1995 RO rating decision which denied 
the veteran’s claim for entitlement to service connection for 
PTSD.  The veteran testified at a personal hearing before a 
member of the Board on travel section at the RO in July 1997.  
A transcript of that hearing is on file. 


REMAND

The appellant contends that he has PTSD which is related to 
traumatic events he experienced while serving with the Army 
in Vietnam from 1965 to 1966.  The claims file includes 
medical evidence showing a current diagnosis of PTSD.  It 
appears that the RO has denied the veteran’s claim because of 
a lack of a verified stressor in service.

Through the course of his appeal, the veteran has asserted 
that certain stressful incidents which occurred while serving 
in Vietnam led to the development of PTSD.  These are 
reported to include: being under life threatening sniper 
fire, working as a combat engineer in outlying locations in 
daily fear of Vietcong attack, viewing the aftermath of a 
battle in the Ben Cat area, seeing bodies in bags at an 
airport, viewing casualties at the Long Bien field hospital, 
and seeing child victims of the war.

A review of the record indicates that further development 
remains to be accomplished.  In particular, although the RO 
sent information provided by the veteran in support of his 
stressors to the U.S. Army and Joint Services Environmental 
Support Group (ESG) [now renamed the U.S. Armed Services 
Center for Research of Unit Records (USASCRUR)], it does not 
appear that a report of its findings has been associated with 
the claims file.  

As information in addition to that which was already sent to 
the USASCRUR has now been added to the claims file, the Board 
has determined that the RO should forward to the USASCRUR any 
additional information regarding the veteran's unit of 
assignment, and his duties and responsibilities during his 
tour in Vietnam, and an account of his particularly stressful 
experiences.  Although the veteran has provided some detailed 
information regarding the claimed stressors, the RO should 
make an additional request for information and forward this 
information to the USASCRUR.

In adjudicating a claim for service connection for PTSD, the 
Board is required to evaluate the supporting evidence in 
light of the places, types, and circumstances of service, as 
evidenced by the veteran's military records, and all 
pertinent medical and lay evidence.  38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b); 
38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (1993); see Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 
60, 66 (1993).  Additionally, service connection for PTSD 
requires medical evidence establishing a clear diagnosis of 
the condition, credible supporting evidence that the claimed 
in-service stressor actually occurred, and a link, 
established by the medical evidence, between current 
symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor.  See 
Zarycki v. Brown, 6 Vet.App. 91, 97 (1993).

In West v. Brown, 7 Vet.App. 70 (1994), the Court elaborated 
on the analysis in Zarycki.  In Zarycki, the Court held that 
in addition to demonstrating the existence of a stressor, the 
facts must also establish that the alleged stressful event 
was sufficient to give rise to PTSD.  In West, the Court held 
that the sufficiency of the stressor is a medical 
determination, and therefore adjudicators may not render a 
determination on this point in the absence of independent 
medical evidence.  The Court also held in West that a 
psychiatric examination for the purpose of establishing the 
existence of PTSD was inadequate for rating purposes because 
the examiners relied, in part, on events whose existence the 
Board had rejected.   

Upon reviewing Zarycki and West, it appears that in 
approaching a claim for service connection for PTSD, the 
question of the existence of an event claimed as a 
recognizable stressor must be resolved by adjudicatory 
personnel.  If the adjudicators conclude that the record 
establishes the existence of such a stressor or stressors, 
then, and only then, the case should be referred for a 
medical examination to determine the sufficiency of the 
stressor and whether the remaining elements required to 
support the diagnosis of PTSD have been met.  In such a 
referral, the adjudicators should specify to the examiner(s) 
precisely what stressors have been accepted as established by 
the record, and the medical examiner(s) must be instructed 
that only those events may be considered in determining 
whether stressors to which the veteran was exposed during 
service were of sufficient severity as to have resulted in 
current psychiatric symptoms.  In other words, if the 
adjudicators determine that the existence of an alleged 
stressor or stressors in service is not established by the 
record, a medical examination to determine whether PTSD due 
to service is present is pointless.  Likewise, if the 
examiner(s) render a diagnosis of PTSD that is not clearly 
based upon stressors in service whose existence the 
adjudicators have accepted, the examination would be 
inadequate for rating purposes. 

The Board also directs the RO to the recent decision of the 
Court in Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 128 (1997) in which the 
Court set out guidelines for PTSD claims.

In view of the foregoing, it is the Board’s judgment that the 
RO should obtain additional information from the veteran 
regarding his alleged in-service stressors and forward this 
information to the USASCRUR for verification of the 
stressors.  If indicated, the RO should then schedule a VA 
psychiatric examination.

Accordingly, the case is hereby REMANDED for the following 
actions:

1.  The RO should take appropriate action 
to contact the veteran and request the 
names, addresses, and approximate dates 
of treatment of all health care providers 
(VA and non-VA) who have treated him for 
psychiatric problems prior to, during, 
and after service. When the veteran 
responds and provides any necessary 
authorizations, the named health care 
providers should be contacted and asked 
to submit copies of all medical records 
documenting their treatment which are not 
already in the claims folder.  All 
records obtained should be associated 
with the claims folder. 

2.  The RO should request from the 
veteran a comprehensive statement 
containing as much detail as possible 
regarding the stressors to which he 
alleges he was exposed in service.  The 
veteran should be asked to provide 
specific details of the claimed stressful 
events during service, such as dates, 
places, detailed descriptions of events 
and identifying information concerning 
any other individuals involved in the 
events, including their names, ranks, 
units of assignment or any other 
identifying detail.  The veteran is 
advised that this information is vitally 
necessary to obtain supportive evidence 
of the stressful events and that he must 
be as specific as possible because 
without such details an adequate search 
for verifying information cannot be 
conducted. 

3.  With the additional information 
obtained and the evidence currently of 
record, the RO should review the file and 
prepare a summary of all the claimed 
stressors.  This summary, together with a 
copy of the DD 214 and the DA Form 20, or 
equivalent, and all associated documents, 
should be sent to the USASCRUR, 7798 
Cissna Road, Springfield, Virginia 22150.  
They should again be requested to provide 
any information that might corroborate 
the veteran's alleged stressors. 

4.  If, and only if, the RO determines 
that the record establishes the existence 
of a stressor or stressors, then the RO 
should arrange for the veteran to be 
accorded a VA psychiatric examination to 
determine the diagnosis of all 
psychiatric disorders that are present.  
The RO must specify for the examiner the 
stressor or stressors that it has 
determined are established by the record 
and the examiner must be instructed that 
only those events may be considered for 
the purpose of determining whether 
exposure to a stressor in service has 
resulted in current psychiatric symptoms 
and, whether the diagnostic criteria to 
support the diagnosis of PTSD have been 
satisfied.  The examination report should 
reflect review of pertinent material in 
the claims folder.  The examiner should 
integrate any previous psychiatric 
findings and diagnoses with current 
findings to obtain a true picture of the 
nature of the veteran's psychiatric 
status.  If the diagnosis of PTSD is 
deemed appropriate, the examiner should 
comment upon the link between the current 
symptomatology and one or more of the in-
service stressors found to be established 
by the RO.  The report of examination 
should include the complete rationale for 
all opinions expressed.  All necessary 
special studies or tests, to include 
psychological testing and evaluation, 
such as the Mississippi Scale for Combat-
Related post- traumatic stress disorders, 
should be accomplished.  The claims 
folder, or copies of all pertinent 
records, must be made available to the 
examiner for review in connection with 
the examination.

5.  The RO should then review the record 
and the claim should be readjudicated.  
If the determination remains adverse to 
the veteran, both he and his 
representative should be provided a 
supplemental statement of the case which 
includes a summary of additional evidence 
submitted, any additional applicable laws 
and regulations, and the reasons for the 
decision.  The veteran and his 
representative should be afforded the 
applicable time to respond.  The case 
should then be returned to the Board for 
further appellate review. 

The purpose of this action is to comply with the holdings of 
the Court.  The Board does not indicate any factual or legal 
conclusion as to any final outcomes warranted in the appeal.  
The veteran need take no action until notified.

This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment by the RO.  
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the 
Board of Veterans’ Appeals or by the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals for additional development or other 
appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.  
See The Veterans’ Benefits Improvements Act of 1994, Pub. L. 
No. 103-446, § 302, 108 Stat. 4645, 4658 (1994), 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 5101 (West Supp. 1997) (Historical and Statutory Notes).  
In addition, VBA’s ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE MANUAL, M21-1, Part 
IV, directs the ROs to provide expeditious handling of all 
cases that have been remanded by the Board and the Court.  
See M21-1, Part IV, paras. 8.44-8.45 and 38.02-38.03.



		
	BARBARA B. COPELAND
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the 
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a 
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the 
Board on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) 
(1996).
- 2 -


