Citation NR: 9739962	
Decision Date: 12/01/97		Archive Date: 12/12/97
DOCKET NO.  96-47 714	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Waco, Texas


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	AMVETS


WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

C. A. Holihan, Associate Counsel



INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from June 1963 to June 
1983.

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) 
on appeal from the August 1995 Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision which denied 
service connection for `PTSD, granted service connection for 
paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, assigned a 10 percent 
disability evaluation, and granted an increased evaluation to 
30 percent for the veteran’s service-connected low back 
disorder.  

The Board notes that the veteran, in his statement dated in 
February, 1995, alleged that he was unable to attain gainful 
employment due to the combination of his service-connected 
low back disability and the frequent panic attacks.  As this 
could be inferred as a claim for total disability benefits 
based on individual unemployability or pension benefits, the 
Board refers this matter to the RO for appropriate action.  


REMAND

In an outpatient treatment report dated in November 1994, a 
service department physician expressed the opinion that the 
veteran had PTSD.  In December 1994, the same physician 
reported only an impression of panic attacks.  In September 
1995, a licensed counselor reported that the veteran had 
experienced a flash back of an event experienced in Vietnam.  
The veteran has reported various stressors experienced while 
serving in Vietnam.  A service acquaintance has supplied a 
statement dated in January 1997, which could be viewed as 
corroborating one of the veteran’s reported stressors.  See 
Souzzi v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 307 (1997).  The United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) has provided detailed 
guidance for the development of claims for service connection 
for PTSD once the veteran has satisfied the initial burden of 
establishing a well-grounded claim.  Zarycki v. Brown, 6 Vet. 
App. 91 (1993).  

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence 
establishing a clear diagnosis of the condition, credible 
supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor 
actually occurred, and a link, established by medical 
evidence, between current symptomatology and the claimed in-
service stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) (1996).  In addition, 
the Court has articulated that, in addressing claims for 
service connection for PTSD, consideration must first be 
given to the evidence required to demonstrate the existence 
of an alleged stressor, and then, if such stressor is found, 
a determination as to whether it is of the quality required 
to support a diagnosis of PTSD must be made.  See Zarycki v. 
Brown, 6 Vet. App. 91; West v. Brown, 7 Vet. App. 70 (1994).  
In West, the Court held that the sufficiency of the stressor 
is a medical determination, and therefore adjudicators may 
not render a determination on this point in the absence of 
independent medical evidence.  

The evidence necessary to establish the occurrence of a 
recognizable stressor during service to support a claim of 
entitlement to service connection for PTSD will vary 
depending on whether or not the veteran was “engaged in 
combat with the enemy.”  If the claimed stressor is related 
to combat, service department evidence that the veteran 
engaged in combat or that the veteran was awarded the Purple 
Heart, Combat Infantryman Badge, or similar combat citation 
will be accepted, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, 
as conclusive evidence of the claimed in-service stressor.  
See 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).  If the evidence does not show that 
he was engaged in combat with the enemy or that the claimed 
stressors are related to such combat, there must be 
corroborative evidence of the claimed stressor.  See Zarycki 
v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 91.  

In the case at hand, the veteran’s service records do not 
show an award of any combat citation, however, there is 
evidence of record suggesting that the veteran may have been 
engaged in combat.  The veteran’s service records indicate 
that he served as an air traffic controller operations 
officer and a “pathfinder” in the Republic of Vietnam from 
December 1968 to November 1969.  The Board notes that the 
claims file does not contain a copy of the veteran’s DD-214 
for the period prior to December 1971, however, the DD-214 on 
file does contain a list of awards and commendations, as well 
as other pertinent information regarding the veteran’s prior 
period of service. 

The veteran’s available service medical records do not 
indicate that he was treated for any psychological complaints 
or illness during service.  However, the veteran’s 
representative has argued in the Informal Hearing 
Presentation, dated in October 1997, that the veteran’s 
complete service medical records have not been obtained, and 
that he was treated during service for psychiatric problems 
while receiving inpatient treatment for low back pain, in 
February and March 1969.  Complete inpatient treatment 
records from these periods are not of record, but 
informational cover sheets are included in veteran’s service 
medical records, confirming hospitalization for low back pain 
while in Vietnam. 

The veteran has identified several stressful events which 
occurred during his tour of duty in Vietnam.  The veteran 
also alleges that he was involved in combat with the enemy, 
and the Board notes that the veteran’s service records 
suggest that the veteran may have been exposed to combat 
while in Vietnam, however combat service has not been 
confirmed, and thus the veteran is not yet entitled to a 
lighter burden of proof with regard to verification of his 
claimed stressors.  The veteran has supplied the RO with 
information, in the form of written submissions and testimony 
at a personal hearing, identifying his assignments while in 
Vietnam, and the events he contends led to his claimed 
disability.

Throughout service in Vietnam, the veteran was assigned to 
the 8th Aerial Port Squadron in Tan Son Nhut Airfield, 
Saigon, Vietnam, were he served as a staff sergeant and a 
combat controller (also called a “pathfinder”).  His duties 
required him to travel throughout the country, assisting with 
the movement of supplies for use in combat.  According to the 
veteran, the responsibility of resupplying combat units often 
involved exposure to combat, and other dangerous or stressful 
experiences.  Specifically, the veteran identified the 
following stressors, which he alleges are the cause of his 
claimed PTSD:  Throughout his tour in Vietnam, the veteran’s 
unit was responsible for loading the bodies of dead U.S. 
servicemen into helicopters and flying them to the mortuary 
in Bien Hoa or Saigon;  The veteran’s unit was attacked by 
the enemy with mortars, in December 1968, while at Moc Hoa, 
Vietnam.  The veteran was in his bunk at the time, and after 
the attack, he found that his flight vest, which was hanging 
just above his bunk, had been pierced by mortar fragments 
(Transcript,. p.3);  In mid-May 1969, at Tam Ky Airport, in 
Vietnam, a Cobra helicopter emergency landed at the veteran’s 
air strip, and the veteran and others in his unit pulled the 
injured pilot and the gunner from the helicopter.  The 
warrant officer gunner, died in the veteran’s arms, and the 
pilot was evacuated from the scene with multiple 
wounds.(Transcript, pp. 3-6).  The veteran does not know the 
name of either man.  The veteran has submitted a statement 
from a Mr. [redacted], who was also present, and confirms the 
veteran’s involvement.  (Statement, dated in January 1997);  
In March 1969, in or near Katum, Vietnam, while helping to 
load heavy equipment (a road grader) under sniper fire, the 
veteran witnessed the Army driver back-up over a soldier, 
killing him (Statement dated in February 1996; Transcript, 
p.4);  In March or April of 1969, in Song Be, Vietnam, the 
veteran’s unit came under rocket and small arms attack from 
the enemy, leaving several of the veteran’s unit wounded 
(Statement, February 1996).

The VA has an affirmative duty to assist the veteran in the 
development of his claim for service-connection for PTSD.  
Thus, the RO is obliged to take steps to verify whether any 
of the veteran’s stressors, whether claimed to have occurred 
in combat, or not, did actually occur.  The veteran has 
provided a statement corroborating the attempted rescue of a 
helicopter gunner and pilot in May 1969, however, other 
claimed stressors should also be verified, if possible.  One 
method of verifying the veteran’s claimed stressors is to 
solicit the assistance of the U.S. Armed Services Center for 
Research of Unit Records (USASCRUR) (formerly known as the 
Environmental Support Group (ESG)), in verifying combat 
status and/or the events described by the veteran.  Though 
the veteran has supplied requested information on several 
occasions and in several forms, the RO has not pursued 
verification of the information through the USASCRUR because 
the RO has considered the claim to be not well-grounded, and 
thus not warranting further development.  As the Board has 
determined that the claim is well-grounded, such an inquiry 
to the USASCRUR is in order.

As stated above, the Board’s determination that the veteran’s 
claim for PTSD is well-grounded on the basis of evidence of a 
possible current diagnosis of PTSD, as provided by Dr. 
Pollard and Mr. Vincent.  In the event that the veteran’s 
claims of combat involvement and exposure to combat and/or 
non-combat stressful situations are verified, further 
development of the veteran’s treatment records must be 
pursued.

The veteran claims that he has received treatment for PTSD, 
however, there is no clear medical diagnosis of PTSD of 
record.  The veteran has been diagnosed with and treated for 
anxiety attacks and a panic disorder, identified as a 
moderate panic disorder with agoraphobia, as well as 
paroxysmal atrial tachycardia and low back pain.  The veteran 
has provided no documentation of his treatment for PTSD, 
though he has identified his panic disorder as being related 
to PTSD.  The veteran has identified several health care 
professionals whom he states have treated him for his 
psychiatric disorders.  Complete records from these 
professionals have not been obtained to-date;  these records 
include records pertaining to the veteran from a Mr. 
Courville, of the Midland Vet Center, Mr. Vincent, Counselor, 
of Abeline, Texas, and Dr. Pollard, of Dyess Air Force Base, 
Texas.  The Board finds that all available medical treatment 
records pertinent to the veteran’s treatment for PTSD and/or 
any other psychiatric condition and/or substance abuse should 
be obtained and considered. 

The veteran was afforded a VA examination to evaluate him for 
PTSD in February 1997.  The examiner concluded that though 
the veteran appeared to have developed symptoms related to 
his panic disorder (without agoraphobia) during active 
service, that any causal relationship to combat experience 
was “tenuous”, and that late-onset PTSD had not yet been 
clearly identified in the veteran.  In the event that the RO 
is able to verify the veteran’s combat stressors, or non-
combat stressors, a complete psychiatric evaluation is in 
order, as there can be no grant of service connection for 
PTSD without sufficient findings of a medical diagnosis based 
on a verified stressor or stressors.

Accordingly, the case is REMANDED for the following:

1.  The RO should contact the veteran 
and request that he provide any 
necessary additional information 
regarding stressors, the units, dates 
and locations of all of his military 
assignments while in Vietnam, and 
describe his duties at each location.  
He should attempt to identify the date 
of each stressor incident, as well as 
the name and/or location of any area 
where such events took place.  He should 
identify other individuals who were 
involved in or witnessed the incidents 
he has previously described.  He should 
indicate whether the events he claims as 
stressors were related to any specific 
operations or missions, and if so, name 
them.  He should be asked to provide, to 
the best of his knowledge, detailed 
accounts of the incidents involving the 
mortar attack on his unit’s post in 
December 1968, at Moc Hoa;  a Cobra 
helicopter pilot or gunner dying in his 
arms in May 1969, at Tam Ky Airport;  
being under sniper fire and witnessing 
the death of a serviceman by being 
crushed under an Army vehicle in March 
1969, in Katum;  and, in March or April 
of 1969, coming under rocket and small 
arms attack in Song Be.  He should 
include any further information as to 
where he was when the incidents 
occurred, the dates, times, locations, 
and witnesses to each, his specific 
involvement or role in each incident, 
the unit he was assigned at the time of 
each claimed incident, and the outcome 
of each incident.  Any other claimed 
stressors should be similarly detailed.  
The veteran must be asked to be as 
specific as possible because, without 
such details, an adequate search for 
corroborating information cannot be 
conducted.  The veteran should be 
informed of the possible consequences of 
his failure to supply adequate 
information regarding his claimed 
stressors, namely that if they cannot be 
corroborated, his claim may be denied.  
The veteran should be given a reasonable 
amount of time in which to respond.

2.  The National Personnel Records Center 
should be contacted for any additional 
personnel or service medical records 
regarding the veteran’s period of active 
duty while enlisted, from June 1963 to 
December 1971, including any additional 
DD-214 forms which may not be of record 
at this time.  Efforts to locate medical 
records pertaining to the veteran’s 
hospitalization in February and March of 
1969, while stationed in Vietnam, should 
be made and documented in the claims 
file.

3.  After the above has been completed to 
the extent possible, the RO must refer 
the case to the U.S. Armed Services 
Center for Research of Unit Records 
(USASCRUR) (formerly known as the United 
States Army and Joint Services 
Environmental Support Group (ESG)) to 
determine whether there is any evidence 
that the veteran engaged in combat with 
the enemy during his service in Vietnam, 
and whether there is corroboration of the 
incidents described by the veteran in his 
statements and hearing testimony.  The RO 
should submit to USASCRUR a copy of this 
remand, a list of the veteran’s unit and 
locations during his service in Vietnam, 
and all claimed stressors with any 
available details, a copy of the 
veteran’s DD Form 214 and his service 
personnel records, and all stressor 
information in the file.  The RO should 
also refer to the statements provided by 
the veteran, as well as his hearing 
testimony for this information.

The USASCRUR is specifically asked 
to provide verification of the 
claims that the veteran was engaged 
in combat with the enemy, that he 
was involved with the transporting 
of deceased soldiers from the field 
to morgues, that he and his unit 
were under enemy attack in December 
1968 at Moc Hoa, and casualties were 
incurred;  that he assisted in the 
attempted rescue of two Cobra 
helicopter pilots on an airstrip at 
Tam Ky Airport, in May 1969, 
resulting in the death of at least 
one warrant officer who was on-board 
the helicopter (reference should be 
made to the statement of Mr. [redacted], 
which is of record);  that he was 
present during a sniper attack on 
his and an Army unit at Katum, in 
March 1969, in which a solider was 
killed accidentally by a piece of 
heavy machinery;  that in Song Be, 
in March or April of 1969, the 
veteran’s unit came under rocket and 
small arms attack, resulting in 
casualties;  as well as verification 
of any additional stressors the 
veteran may identify in connection 
with further development of his 
claim.  

In the event that this information 
is not available from USASCRUR, the 
RO must endeavor to obtain it from 
the service department, VA records 
or from other official sources. 

If the veteran can not provide a specific 
date of a cited incident, unit records or 
logs for the period of the veteran’s 
service with that unit should be 
requested.  If verification is not 
available through USASCRUR, the RO should 
determine any source from which it might 
be obtained and then try to obtain it.  
If the veteran has identified any 
individuals who were also present, or 
were injured or killed during the event, 
the RO should try to obtain verification 
that such individuals served with the 
veteran’s unit, or were in the area at 
the time of the cited event.

4.  The RO should also request that the 
veteran identify all treatment or 
evaluation he has received for panic 
attacks, an anxiety disorder, 
agoraphobia, PTSD, and any other 
psychiatric disorders, or substance abuse 
since service, including the dates of 
treatment, and the names and addresses of 
all physicians and facilities that have 
treated him.  After obtaining appropriate 
authorization, the RO should attempt to 
obtain the medical records that are not 
already in the claims file.  Included 
should be records of all periods of 
treatment at the Vet Center of Midland, 
Texas, and records from treatment by Mr. 
Vincent, certified counselor, of Abeline, 
Texas, and Dr. Pollard, of Dyess Air 
Force Base Hospital, Texas.  Any response 
to the RO’s requests should be included 
in the claims file.


5.  Thereafter, if the RO determines that 
the veteran engaged in combat with the 
enemy or if there is corroboration of any 
claimed stressor, or there is no evidence 
to contradict the supporting evidence 
provided by the statement of Mr. [redacted], 
the veteran should be afforded a VA 
psychiatric examination by a board 
certified psychiatrist, experienced in 
the diagnosis and assessment of PTSD, to 
determine the correct diagnoses of all 
psychiatric disorders present.  The 
veteran should be informed upon 
notification of the examination of the 
potential consequences of his failure to 
attend and cooperate with the 
examination.  The entire claims folder 
and a copy of this remand must be made 
available to the examiner prior to the 
examination, the receipt of which must be 
acknowledged in the examination report.  
The examination should include 
psychological tests with PTSD subscales, 
the results of which should be reviewed 
before a final psychiatric diagnosis is 
given.  The RO must specify for the 
examiner any stressor(s) that it has 
determined are established by the record 
and the examiner must be instructed that 
only those events may be considered for 
the purpose of determining whether the 
veteran was exposed to a stressor in 
service.  Specifically, the examiner must 
determine whether or not the veteran has 
PTSD.  In that regard the examiner’s 
attention is directed to the applicable 
portions of the DSM-III and DSM-IV.  If a 
diagnosis of PTSD is made, the examiner 
should state which of the diagnostic 
criteria of DSM-IV or DSM-III for PTSD 
have and have not been satisfied and 
provide a detailed description and 
discussion of the complaints and findings 
that satisfy the criteria.  The examiner 
also should specify: (1) whether 
stressor(s) found to be established by 
the record by the RO were sufficient to 
produce PTSD; and (2) whether there is a 
link between the current symptomatology 
and one or more of the in- service 
stressors found to be established by the 
record by the RO and found to be 
sufficient to produce PTSD by the 
examiners.  Further, the examiner should 
identify any and all other psychiatric 
disorders present, and indicate whether 
any is related to service.  The examiner 
should be asked to distinguish, if 
possible, the symptomatology of any other 
psychiatric disorder identified, from 
PTSD, if identified.  A complete 
rationale for all opinions expressed by 
the examiner must be provided.

7.  The RO should then review the 
veteran’s claims file and ensure that the 
examination report is responsive to the 
Board’s request.  The claim should be 
readjudicated with consideration of all 
pertinent law, regulations, and Court 
decisions.  If the veteran’s claim 
remains in a denied status, he and his 
representative should be provided with a 
supplemental statement of the case, which 
includes any additional pertinent law and 
regulations and a full discussion of 
action taken on the veteran’s claim, 
consistent with the Court’s instructions 
in Gilbert v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 49 
(1990).  The applicable response time 
should be allowed.

Thereafter, the case should be returned to the Board, if in 
order.  The veteran need take no action unless otherwise 
notified.

This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment by the RO.  
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the 
Board of Veterans’ Appeals or by the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals for additional development or other 
appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.  
See The Veterans’ Benefits Improvements Act of 1994, Pub. L. 
No. 103-446, § 302, 108 Stat. 4645, 4658 (1994), 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 5101 (West Supp. 1997) (Historical and Statutory Notes).  
In addition, VBA’s ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE MANUAL, M21-1, Part 
IV, directs the ROs to provide expeditious handling of all 
cases that have been remanded by the Board and the Court.  
See M21-1, Part IV, paras. 8.44-8.45 and 38.02-38.03.


		
	MARK D. HINDIN
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the 
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a 
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the 
Board on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) 
(1996).


- 2 -


