Citation Nr: 9810855	
Decision Date: 04/08/98    Archive Date: 04/28/98

DOCKET NO.  91-43 215	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Roanoke, 
Virginia


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Paralyzed Veterans of America, 
Inc.


WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

Jean Steadman, Associate Counsel
INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from February 1968 to 
November 1969.

This matter comes before the Board of Veterans’ Appeals 
(Board) on appeal from adverse rating determinations by the 
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) 
located in Roanoke, Virginia.  This case was previously 
remanded by the Board in November 1991 and February 1996.


REMAND

The veteran is seeking service connection for PTSD.  His DD 
Form 214 reflects that the veteran was awarded the National 
Defense Service Medal, Vietnam Service Medal (w/FMF Insignia 
& 1 Br Star), and a Vietnam Campaign Medal (w/Device 60-).  
His service personnel records reflect that he served at Camp 
Haines, Camp Evans, and the Republic of Vietnam.

The veteran filed his original claim for service connection 
for PTSD in October 1989.  In a December 1990 rating action, 
the RO denied service connection for PTSD and this appeal 
ensued.  

Of record are VA treatment and hospitalization records from 
VA Medical Center’s (VAMC’s) in Salisbury, North Carolina; 
Durham, North Carolina; Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Salem, 
Virginia, and Hampton, Virginia, from November 1986 to 
December 1995.  As early as November 1986, the veteran was 
diagnosed with PTSD.  The veteran’s treatment records reveal 
treatment for various disabilities, including PTSD and 
alcohol abuse. 

A November 1990 VA examiner diagnosed the veteran with 
antisocial personality disorder with narcissistic features 
and alcohol dependence, mixed substance abuse, by history.  
After an April 1994 VA examination, the examiner noted that 
given the veteran’s on-going alcohol abuse, it was not 
possible to determine whether the veteran met the criteria 
for PTSD set forth in the DSM-IIIR.  After re-examination in 
October 1994, the examiner concluded that the veteran’s 
diagnoses were alcohol dependence and anxiety disorder not 
otherwise specified with depressive features.

In March 1994, the veteran submitted a statement to the RO 
detailing his in service stressors.

In February 1997 the former Environmental Support Group (ESG) 
[now U. S. Armed Services Center for Research of Unit Records 
(USASCRUR)] confirmed that members of the U. S. Naval Mobile 
Construction Battalion ELEVEN (MCB-11) were exposed to motor 
and rocket attacks in areas including Camp Haines and Camp 
Evans during the veteran’s tour of duty.  The records also 
confirmed that members of the Landing Zone (LZ) Nancy 
assisted in extinguishing ammunitions fires.  Additionally, 
the history verified that passenger vehicles struck land 
mines in August and September 1969.

The Board finds that further inquiry is needed, as the VA 
regulations pertaining to psychiatric disorders have changed 
during the pendency of this appeal.  Effective November 7, 
1996, the VA has adopted the most recent Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) as the basis 
for determining whether the veteran has PTSD for compensation 
purposes.  61 Fed. Reg. 52695 (Oct. 8, 1996).  Whereas the 
previously applicable DSM-III-R criteria required that in 
order to establish a diagnosis of PTSD, the veteran must have 
undergone an experience which would have been of sufficient 
gravity to evoke the symptoms of PTSD in “almost anyone,” 
and the stressor had to be outside the range of usual human 
experience, and be markedly distressing to almost anyone, a 
diagnosis may now be established under DSM-IV when the 
veteran experiences, witnesses, or is confronted with an 
event or events that involve actual or threatened death or 
serious injury, or a threat to his physical integrity or that 
of others, and his response involves intense fear, 
helplessness, or horror.  Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet. App. 128 
(1997).  

The Board is cognizant of the veteran’s lengthy appeals 
process and does not desire to perpetuate this any longer 
than necessary however, the Board believes that further 
development of the evidence is necessary, to include a 
determination of any stressors and an examination to clarify 
the current psychiatric diagnosis and to determine whether 
the veteran meets the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD under 
the DSM-IV criteria.  Such remand will afford the veteran an 
additional opportunity to provide information concerning his 
claimed stressors.  

Moreover, in a May 1997 statement, the veteran’s 
representative requested a travel board hearing.  The veteran 
and his representative were advised by letter that he would 
have to file a motion to request such hearing since he had 
not requested such hearing within 90 days of the notice that 
his claim was being forwarded to the Board in 1991.  A review 
of the record reflects that the veteran requested a hearing 
on his substantive appeal in April 1991.  While he further 
indicated that he wanted a hearing before RO personnel, he 
was sent a letter in April 1991 acknowledging his request 
before a traveling section of the Board.  He was told that, 
unless he notified the RO, his name would remain on the list 
of those who desire a hearing.  A subsequent letter scheduled 
him for a hearing before RO personnel, but there was no 
indication that he asked to be taken off the travel board 
list.  Since there is some confusion as to whether he does 
want a hearing, this matter should be clarified.  

The case is therefore REMANDED to the RO for the following 
actions:

1.  The veteran should be contacted and 
requested to furnish a complete list of 
all medical personnel and facilities from 
which he has received treatment for PTSD.  
Any such treatment records not already 
associated with the veteran’s claims 
folder should be obtained. Any available 
records so obtained should be associated 
with the veteran’s claims folder. 

2.  The RO should review any information 
obtained and specify the stressors which 
are either consistent with the veteran’s 
service or verified by the evidence.  

3.  The RO should arrange to have the 
veteran examined by a VA psychiatrist in 
order to determine the diagnoses of all 
psychiatric disorders that are currently 
present.  The examination report should 
reflect review by the examiner of all 
pertinent information in the claims 
folder, including the determination by 
the RO of any accepted stressors.  If 
PTSD is diagnosed, the examiner should 
specify (1) whether the in-service 
stressors were sufficient to produce PTSD 
under DSM-III-R or DSM-IV; (2) whether 
the remaining diagnostic criteria to 
support a diagnosis of PTSD under DSM-
III R or DSM-IV have been satisfied; and 
(3) whether there is a link between the 
current symptomatology and the stressors 
in service whose existence has been 
established. The examination report 
should include a complete rationale for 
all opinions expressed.  All necessary 
special studies or tests, including 
psychological testing and evaluation, 
should be accomplished as part of this 
examination.  The claims folder and a 
copy of this remand must be made 
available to the examiner for review 
prior to the examination.

4.  The RO should then, review the record 
and ensure that all the above actions 
have been completed.  When the RO is 
satisfied that the record is complete and 
the psychiatric examination is adequate 
for rating purposes, the RO should 
proceed with an adjudication of the claim 
on the merits.  

5.  Thereafter, the RO should clarify 
whether the veteran still desires a 
travel board hearing.  If so, he should 
be placed on the list for such hearing.  

Thereafter, if the benefit sought is not granted, a 
supplemental statement of the case should be issued to the 
veteran and his representative and they should be provided an 
opportunity  to respond.  Subsequently, the claims folder 
should be returned to the Board for further review, if 
necessary.  By this action, the Board intimates no opinion 
legal or factual, as to the ultimate disposition warranted as 
to this specific issue.

While this case is in remand status, the veteran is free to 
submit additional evidence and argument on the question at 
issue.  See Quarles v. Derwinski, 3 Vet.App. 129, 141 (1992).

This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment by the RO.  
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the 
Board of Veterans’ Appeals or by the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals for additional development or other 
appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.  
See The Veterans’ Benefits Improvements Act of 1994, Pub. L. 
No. 103-446, § 302, 108 Stat. 4645, 4658 (1994), 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 5101 (West Supp. 1997) (Historical and Statutory Notes).  
In addition, VBA’s ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE MANUAL, M21-1, Part 
IV, directs the ROs to provide expeditious handling of all 
cases that have been remanded by the Board and the Court.  
See M21-1, Part IV, paras. 8.44-8.45 and 38.02-38.03.


		
	V. L. Jordan
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the 
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a 
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the 
Board on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) 
(1996).
- 2 -
