Citation Nr: 9819622	
Decision Date: 06/26/98    Archive Date: 07/06/98

DOCKET NO.  96-06 390	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Columbia, 
South Carolina


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Disabled American Veterans


WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

C. C. Bruu, Associate Counsel


INTRODUCTION

The veteran had active duty from February 1964 to September 
1967. 

This matter comes to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) 
from an April 1995 rating decision of the Columbia, South 
Carolina, Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) which denied service connection for PTSD.  The 
denial was confirmed by rating decisions in July 1995 and 
October 1995.


REMAND

A claim for service connection for PTSD requires medical 
evidence establishing a clear diagnosis of the condition, 
credible supporting evidence that the claimed inservice 
stressor(s) actually occurred, and a link, established by 
medical evidence, between current symptomatology and service.  
If the claimed in-service stressor is related to combat, 
service department evidence that the veteran engaged in 
combat or that the veteran was awarded a combat citation will 
be accepted, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, as 
conclusive evidence of the claimed inservice stressor.  See 
38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b) (West 1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f) 
(1997).

Where, however, the VA determines that the veteran did not 
engage in combat, the veteran’s lay testimony, by itself, 
will not be sufficient to establish the alleged stressor(s).  
Instead, the record must contain service records or other 
independent credible evidence to corroborate the veteran’s 
testimony as to any alleged stressor.  Dizoglio v. Brown, 9 
Vet.App. 163, 166 (1996).  Those service records which are 
available must support and not contradict the veteran’s lay 
testimony concerning the non-combat stressors.  Doran v. 
Brown, 6 Vet.App. 283, 289 (1994).

Also, in Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 128, 138 (1997), the 
United States Court of Veterans Appeals emphasized the three 
elements required by section 3.304(f) to warrant a grant of 
service connection for PTSD:  (1) a current, clear medical 
diagnosis of PTSD; (2) credible supporting evidence that the 
claimed in-service stressor actually occurred; and (3) 
medical evidence of a causal nexus between current 
symptomatology and the specific claimed in-service stressor.  
The Court further held that, if the claimed stressor is not 
combat related, a veteran's lay testimony regarding in-
service stressors is insufficient to establish the occurrence 
of the stressor and must be corroborated by "credible 
supporting evidence."  Id. at 142.

The veteran’s Air Force Form 7, Airman Military Record, 
reflects that the veteran’s specialty was aircraft propeller 
mechanic.  In September 1966, he was assigned to 377 CSGP Tan 
Son Nhut AB RVN (PACAF).  In November 1966, he was assigned 
to 460 FMS Tan Son Nhut AB RVN (PACAF) and to another unit at 
Cam Ranh Bay AB.  In January 1967, he was assigned to 6483 
Cam Sq Cam Ranh Bay AB, and then to 483 Cam Sq.  His DD Form 
214, Armed Forces of the United States Report of Transfer or 
Discharge, reflects that his awards and decorations included 
the National Defense Service Medal, the Vietnam Service 
Medal, and the Air Force Good Conduct Medal.  It does not 
reflect award of the Purple Heart, the Combat Infantryman 
Badge, or other combat citation.

Service medical records are negative for any complaints or 
findings of a disorder of a psychiatric nature.  We note 
that, at his entrance examination in February 1964, the 
veteran reported a history of nervous trouble; however, at an 
examination in August 1964, and upon subsequent examinations, 
no such report was made, and no psychiatric disorder was 
noted at separation.

The veteran filed an original application for compensation or 
pension in October 1994, seeking service connection for PTSD.  

VA outpatient treatment records, dated in September 1994, 
indicate the veteran presented with complaint that he had 
been depressed lately.  Regarding past psychiatric history, 
he reported that he had been depressed about five years 
before, treated at the Pee Dee Mental Health Clinic for five 
to six months, and took anti-depressants.  He reported that 
he was currently working as a desk clerk at a motel and had 
had 30 jobs in the past 30 years.  He denied suicidal thought 
and said that his sleep was poor due to a bad hip.  The 
impression was dysthymic disorder.  In November 1994, he 
reported that he was still depressed; he was to follow up at 
the Pee Dee Mental Health Clinic.  

In a February 1995 statement, the veteran listed his jobs 
from the time of his discharge from service in 1967 through 
the present.  In an April 1995 statement, he listed ways he 
was affected by his Vietnam experience, including failing at 
two marriages and other relationships.  The veteran’s ex-wife 
submitted a statement in April 1995, describing her 
observation of the changes in the veteran between the time he 
left for Vietnam and his return.  

A report of the Pee Dee Mental Health Center indicates the 
veteran was seen on November 4, 1994, and failed to report 
for followup on November 28, 1994.  A record of that facility 
dated November 4, 1994, indicates that the veteran had been 
seen there five years before.  He reported that he got 
better, stopped coming, did “O.K.” for about three years, 
but had been sliding for the past two years.  He was on 
Prozac, which he received at a VA facility.  He felt it was 
working.  He was sleeping well, his appetite was good, he had 
more energy, and he was employed.  He said he had never been 
self-destructive or abused drugs or alcohol, and had never 
had flashbacks.  He was oriented in all spheres.  There was 
no evidence of thought disorder.  He was not currently 
depressed.  He was told that he could be seen again at the 
facility but that he would probably be better served by a 
local medical doctor as he did not appear to need 
psychotherapy.  He was return to the clinic in two weeks.  
Diagnosis was depressive disorder and “R/O [i.e., rule out] 
depression.”  

VA outpatient treatment records dated in August 1995 indicate 
the veteran presented with request for a mental health clinic 
referral, for depression and anxiety, with questionable 
relationship to service in Vietnam.  He reported that he had 
no suicidal ideation, no energy, a loss of desire and 
interest, and some sleeping difficulty.  Objective findings 
included clear and concise speech, normal thought content, 
and no depression.  Diagnosis was depression/anxiety by 
history.  It was recommended that he follow up at his county 
mental health department.  A record of October 1995 indicates 
the veteran spoke of seeing body bags and holes in planes in 
Tan Son Nhut.  Assessment was dysthymia versus PTSD.  

In a statement received by the RO in October 1995, the 
veteran stated he was not working and had not worked since 
February 1995.  He referred to an excerpt from the 1994 
edition of “Federal Benefits for Veterans and Dependents” 
and stated that he had some of the symptoms listed there for 
PTSD.  He claimed he had intrusive recollections or memories, 
anxiety, sudden reactions after exposure to traumatic 
conditions, and readjustment difficulties affecting 
functioning in family or work.  

In a statement submitted in December 1995, the veteran 
described his stressors.  He stated that he was in Vietnam 
from September 1966 to September 1967.  He first went to Tan 
Son Nhut.  He was an aircraft mechanic.  He stated that the 
base was attacked at night, that he went to the hangar to 
escape, and that he saw body bags in the morning.  He did not 
have a gun.  He felt scared and helpless and thought of home.  
He next went to Cam Ranh Bay.  On the way back from the local 
town one time he heard what sounded like “a lot of guns 
going off all over the place.”  He looked for a ditch to 
hide in but could not find one.  The experience, he said, was 
very shocking.  He next went to Pleiku.  As this was closer 
to the demilitarized zone, he and the others there were 
constantly watching for the Viet Cong.  They had south 
Vietnamese working on the base and some were good and some 
were bad.  This, he said, was nerve-racking.  Thereafter, he 
went back to Cam Ranh Bay and, after one month, went home.  
He also described his experiences when he got home.

VA outpatient treatment record, dated in January 1996, 
indicates the veteran reported intrusive daily thoughts, no 
nightmares, and severe anxiety periods.  The assessment was 
PTSD versus dysthymic disorder.  A record of August 1996 
indicates the veteran reported that he had periods where he 
did not want to be around anybody, could not cope with 
anything, had exaggerated startle reaction, and was 
hypervigilant but not suicidal.  He reported that he was 
“hit 3 nights by enemy at Tan.”  Objective findings 
included cognitive impairment of short term and immediate 
memory, reduced attention span and concentration; he was 
found to be inflexible and inefficient, and his behavior and 
emotions were unreliable and unpredictable.  Assessment was 
chronic PTSD with severe anxiety symptoms.  



The veteran testified at a personal hearing before a hearing 
officer at the RO in September 1996.  With respect to events 
in Vietnam, he stated that he was an aircraft/propeller 
mechanic and was always stationed out of a base itself.  He 
was stationed at Ton Son Nhut from September 1966 to January 
1967.  The base was attacked three nights in a row and he saw 
body bags.  One of the Viet Cong that got killed was a barber 
who had cut his hair a week before.  He had temporary duty 
for two weeks in Cam Ranh Bay.  The base there was not 
attacked.  He also mentioned other periods of temporary duty, 
including one involving an airplane with mechanical problems; 
they had to fly in, fix it, and get back out.  He described 
the effects that he believed these experiences had on him.

A VA outpatient treatment record, dated in November 1996, 
indicates the veteran returned with continuing problems of 
PTSD and depression.  His recent hearing at the RO, and 
notification of continued denial of service connection for 
PTSD, were noted.  Assessment was chronic PTSD and severe 
anxiety symptoms.  He was to return to the clinic, for one 
more visit, in six months, at which time, if he had no 
“documentation,” he would have to be discharged.  It was 
noted that the veteran planned to pursue further 
documentation of his stressors from the National Archives.  A 
record of May 1997 reflects additional follow up for PTSD.  
It was noted that the veteran had not worked since 1992 and 
was currently unemployable on a full-time/regular basis.  

Copies of military records, pertaining to combat operations 
at Tan Son Nhut Air Base in December 1966, were received from 
the veteran in June and September 1997.  The records reflect 
that the base received a combined mortar and sapper 
penetration attack between 0105 and 0315 hours on 4 December 
1966, and that search-and-destroy and counter-action 
continued until 1340 hours on 5 December 1966.  There were 
three U.S. Air Force members killed in action, three members 
of ARVN, and 28 members of the enemy forces.  The records do 
not reflect any direct involvement of the veteran’s assigned 
unit.

Additional multiple statements in support of the claim were 
submitted by the veteran in June, July, August, and December 
1997, and in April 1998.

VA outpatient treatment records of July and September 1997 
indicate the veteran underwent a Minnesota Multi-phasic 
Personality Inventory (MMPI).  Assessment was severe PTSD and 
generalized anxiety/depression.  In a record of November 1997 
and a report of the treating physician of November 1997, the 
physician stated that the veteran was apparently suffering 
from PTSD or anxiety disorder or depression.  The MMPI had 
shown depression and anxiety, rather severe.  The physician 
reported that the veteran had “documented stressors.”

A VA examination was conducted in November 1997.  The 
examiner reported that he had reviewed the veteran’s claims 
file.  The veteran described problems being around people and 
a problematic work history.  With respect to stressors in 
service, he reported attacks on his bases.  He reported that 
he was in a hangar at the time.  The examiner reported that 
the veteran did not give vivid details of facing horrific 
events, but did describe being frightened.  The impression 
was generalized anxiety disorder with panic attacks.  The 
examiner stated that, while the veteran was clearly 
moderately to severely disabled due to a psychiatric 
disorder, with a Global Assessment of Functioning score of 
about 50, the examiner was not convinced that the veteran had 
really undergone a life-threatening stressor while in 
Vietnam, and his symptoms seemed more to revolve around 
generalized anxiety and goraphobia [sic] than intrusive 
thoughts from Vietnam.  

Thus, it appears from the record that the veteran has 
submitted credible supporting evidence that an event which he 
has associated with his claimed inservice stressor, i.e., an 
attack on Tan Son Nhut Air Base, actually occurred.  See 
Cohen, at 142.

However, the Board observes that the medical record contains 
multiple diagnoses of the veteran’s psychiatric disorder.  He 
has been diagnosed as suffering from dysthymia, depression, 
anxiety, and panic attacks, in addition to being diagnosed 
with PTSD.  Under these circumstances, it is appropriate that 
the veteran be scheduled for another VA psychiatric 
examination to determine his current diagnosis.  It is also 
important that the examiner address the etiological 
relationship of any diagnosed neuropsychiatric disorder, if 
any, to the veteran's service.  More specifically, 
development is necessary with respect to the required element 
of linkage between current PTSD symptomatology and the 
corroborated in-service stressors.  The question as to 
whether the corroboration of the veteran’s base having been 
subject to attack, which resulted in casualties and equipment 
damage and losses (the occurrence of which have been 
established by the record) contributed to the veteran’s 
current symptoms of PTSD must be addressed.  See Cohen, at 
138.

This remand is mandated by precedential caselaw of the Court 
of Veterans Appeals, which has held, as discussed above, 
that, under 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f), eligibility for service 
connection requires, among other things, “[a] current, clear 
medical diagnosis of PTSD . . . .”  Cohen, 10 Vet.App. at 
138 (1997); see also Suozzi v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 307, 309 
(1997).  Moreover, the Court has noted that the regulatory 
requirement of a “clear diagnosis” of PTSD means an 
“unequivocal” one, see Cohen, 10 Vet.App. at 139.  In 
evaluating diagnoses, “the adjudicators may reject a claim 
only upon finding a preponderance of the evidence against a 
PTSD diagnosis . . . .”  Id., at 153 (Nebeker, C.J., 
concurring).  Since the evidence of record at this time 
contains conflicting psychiatricdiagnoses, including PTSD, it 
is our opinion that further development of this claim is 
necessary.

The Board recognizes that, during the pendency of the 
veteran’s appeal, VA issued a final rule, which took effect 
on November 7, 1996, amending that portion of the Schedule 
for Rating Disabilities pertaining to mental disorders.  61 
Fed. Reg. 52,695 (Oct. 8, 1996) (now codified at 38 C.F.R. 
part 4).  In part, that final rule replaced 38 C.F.R. § 4.130 
with a new section that adopted the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition (DSM-
IV), as the basis for the nomenclature of the rating schedule 
for mental disorders, in place of the earlier version of that 
text, DSM-III.  As the Court noted in its Cohen decision, 
supra, a significant change from DSM-III to DSM-IV is that 
the diagnostic criteria for a PTSD stressor (that is, the 
requirements for determining the sufficiency of a claimed 
stressor) “are no longer based solely on usual experience 
and response but are individualized (geared to the specific 
individual’s actual experience and response).”  Cohen, 10 
Vet.App. at 141.

As a general matter, where there has been a change in 
pertinent regulations while a claim is pending, a claimant is 
entitled to have his or her claim adjudicated under whichever 
version would be more favorable, the old or the new.  See 
Karnas v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 308 (1991).  The issue in 
this case is two-pronged -- the sufficiency of the veteran’s 
claimed stressor(s), and whether he has current adequate 
symptomatology to support a “clear diagnosis” of PTSD.  The 
new rule made no change in the specific PTSD regulation, 
38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f), and the Court has held that the DSM-IV 
diagnostic criteria for PTSD symptomatology do not raise an 
issue with regard to the Karnas principle.  Cohen, 10 
Vet.App. at 139.  However, we mention this change to guide 
the RO in readjudicating this case on remand, particularly 
because a comment by the VA examiner in November 1997, to the 
effect that it was doubtful the veteran had experienced a 
life-threatening stressor in Vietnam, may have been made in 
light of the previous, non-individualized diagnostic criteria 
of DSM-IV.

VA has a duty to assist a veteran in developing facts 
pertinent to a well-grounded claim.  38 U.S.C.A. § 5107(a) 
(West 1991); 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.103, 3.159 (1997).  That duty 
includes obtaining medical records and medical examinations 
where indicated by the facts and circumstances of an 
individual case.  See Murphy v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 78 
(1990); Littke v. Derwinski, 1 Vet.App. 90 (1990).

Accordingly, further appellate consideration will be deferred 
and the case is REMANDED to the RO for the following actions:

1.  The RO should contact the veteran 
and request that he provide the names 
and addresses of all medical care 
providers who have treated him for his 
claimed PTSD.  The RO should request 
that the veteran furnish signed 
authorizations for release to VA of 
private medical records in connection 
with each non-VA source identified.  The 
RO should attempt to obtain any such 
private treatment records, not already 
on file, which may exist and incorporate 
them into the claims folder.  The RO 
should also obtain any records of VA 
treatment after November 1997.



2.  The RO should then schedule the 
veteran for a VA psychiatric examination 
in order to determine his current 
neuropsychiatric diagnosis, if any.  It 
is critical that the claims folder, 
along with any additional evidence 
requested above, be provided to the 
examiner for review.  The examination 
report should reflect review of 
pertinent material in the claims folder 
and include the complete rationale for 
all opinions expressed.  Any necessary 
special studies or tests, to include 
psychological testing, should be 
accomplished.  In determining whether 
the veteran experienced an inservice 
stressor that may be related to any 
diagnosed disorder, the examiner is 
hereby notified that only the verified 
history detailed in the military records 
pertaining to combat operations at Tan 
Son Nhut Air Base in December 1966, may 
be relied upon.  Based on his/her review 
of the case, the examiner should express 
an opinion, if possible, as to the 
medical probability that any currently 
demonstrated disorder is etiologically 
related to the veteran’s service.

3.  After the development requested 
above has been completed, the RO should 
again review the entire record.  If the 
determination remains unfavorable to the 
veteran, the RO should furnish him and 
his representative with a supplemental 
statement of the case, in accordance 
with 38 U.S.C.A. § 7105 (West 1991).  
Thereafter, the veteran and his 
representative should be given the 
opportunity to respond.  The case should 
then be returned to the Board for 
further appellate consideration, if 
otherwise in order, following 
appropriate appellate procedure.


By this REMAND the Board intimates no opinion, either legal 
or factual, as to the ultimate determination warranted in 
this case.  The purpose of this REMAND is to further develop 
the record.  No action is required by the veteran until he 
receives further notice.

This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment by the RO.  
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the 
Board of Veterans’ Appeals or by the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals for additional development or other 
appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.  
See The Veterans’ Benefits Improvements Act of 1994, Pub. L. 
No. 103-446, § 302, 108 Stat. 4645, 4658 (1994), 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 5101 (West Supp. 1997) (Historical and Statutory Notes).  
In addition, VBA’s ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE MANUAL, M21-1, Part 
IV, directs the ROs to provide expeditious handling of all 
cases that have been remanded by the Board and the Court.  
See M21-1, Part IV, paras. 8.44-8.45 and 38.02-38.03.



		
	ANDREW J. MULLEN 
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals


Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the 
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a 
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the 
Board on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) 
(1996).

- 2 -
