Citation Nr: 9828344	
Decision Date: 09/22/98    Archive Date: 10/01/98

DOCKET NO.  96-31 885A	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO)
in Boston, Massachusetts


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


REPRESENTATION

Appellant represented by:	Disabled American Veterans


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

C. Wasser Chambers, Associate Counsel


INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from December 1970 to July 
1972.

This case comes to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) 
from an October 1995 RO decision which denied service 
connection for PTSD.  An RO hearing was requested and 
scheduled, but the veteran canceled his hearing request, as 
indicated by the RO hearing officer in an October 1997 
deferred rating decision.

In a July 1998 decision, the RO granted entitlement to non-
service-connected disability pension benefits, and such issue 
is not on appeal.


REMAND

The veteran contends he has PTSD, which is attributable to 
traumatic experiences while serving in the Air Force in 
Greece during the Vietnam era.  Regardless of whether or not 
his claim is well grounded, the VA has an obligation to help 
him complete his application for benefits.  38 U.S.C.A. § 
5103(a) (West 1991); Robinette v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 69 
(1995). 

In order to establish service connection for PTSD, there must 
be medical evidence establishing a clear diagnosis of the 
condition, credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-
service stressor actually occurred and a link, established by 
medical evidence, between current symptomatology and the 
claimed in-service stressor.  If the claimed stressor is 
related to combat, service department evidence that the 
veteran engaged in combat or that the veteran was awarded the 
Purple Heart, Combat Infantryman Badge, or similar combat 
citation will be accepted, in the absence of evidence to the 
contrary, as conclusive evidence of the claimed in-service 
stressor.  38 C.F.R.§ 3.304(f).

The veteran served on active duty in the Air Force from 
December 1970 to July 1972.  A review of his DD Form 214 
shows that his primary military occupational specialty was 
that of a Morse system operator, and does not indicate either 
that he was stationed in Vietnam or that he engaged in 
combat.  His service personnel records are not associated 
with the file.  The Board finds that such records should be 
obtained. 

A July 1995 VA psychological outpatient treatment record 
shows that the veteran reported that during active Air Force 
service, he was stationed in Greece as a communications 
specialist and was responsible for sending out the 
coordinates for sites which were to be bombed in Vietnam.  
The diagnostic assessment was deferred; rule out PTSD.  At a 
February 1996 VA psychological evaluation, the examiner noted 
that although the veteran reported some symptoms consistent 
with PTSD, he did not have PTSD.  The diagnostic assessment 
was dysthymia. 

Private medical records from Soldiers’ Home in Massachusetts, 
Chelsea, dated from 1993 to 1997 primarily relate to 
treatment for orthopedic complaints, but some of the records 
indicate diagnoses of PTSD.  Such records do not indicate the 
stressors on which such diagnoses were based.

Service connection for PTSD has been denied by the RO partly 
on the grounds that there is no clear diagnosis of PTSD or 
credible evidence of an in-service stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 
3.304(f).  Since the veteran did not engage in combat, his 
statements and testimony are inadequate to prove the 
occurrence of a stressor in service; such a stressor must be 
established by official service records or other credible 
supporting evidence.  Cohen v. Brown, 10 Vet.App. 128 (1997); 
Doran v. Brown, 6 Vet. App. 283 (1994).  The RO should obtain 
a statement from the veteran as to his claimed in-service 
stressors, and should then attempt to corroborate the 
statements of stressors with the U.S. Armed Services Center 
for Research of Unit Records (USASCRUR).  

The Board finds that a VA examination should be provided to 
ascertain whether there is a clear diagnosis of PTSD based on 
any verified in-service stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f); 
Cohen, supra.  The medical evidence indicates that the 
veteran has been receiving episodic private psychiatric 
treatment in recent years; ongoing treatment records should 
be obtained. 

Therefore, the case is REMANDED to the RO for the following 
development:

1.  The RO should obtain, from the 
National Personnel Records Center (NPRC), 
service personnel records of the veteran 
concerning his Air Force active duty.  

2.  The RO should then ask the veteran to 
provide a detailed written account 
(including dates, locations, names of 
other persons involved, unit 
designations, etc.) of the alleged 
service stressors for PTSD.  The RO 
should forward the veteran’s statement 
(along with copies of his service 
personnel records and any other relevant 
evidence) to the USASCRUR, and request 
that organization investigate and attempt 
to verify the alleged stressors.  

3.  The RO should have the veteran 
identify (names, addresses, dates) all 
sources of VA or non-VA treatment or 
examination for any psychiatric disorder 
since 1997.  The RO should then contact 
the sources and obtain copies of the 
related medical records, which are not 
already on file.

4.  Following completion of the above 
development, the veteran should be 
afforded a VA psychiatric examination 
concerning claimed PTSD.  The claims 
folder must be provided to and reviewed 
by the examiner.  PTSD should be 
diagnosed or ruled out in accordance with 
the standards of DSM-IV.  If PTSD is 
diagnosed, the doctor should clearly 
identify the claimed events which are 
considered stressors supporting the 
diagnosis, and the doctor should fully 
explain why the stressors are considered 
sufficient under the standards of DSM-IV.

5.  Thereafter, the RO should review the 
claim for service connection for PTSD.  
If the claim remains denied, then a 
supplemental statement of the case should 
be issued to the veteran and his 
representative, and they should be given 
an opportunity to respond.  Then, the 
case should be returned to the Board for 
further appellate review.



		
	L. W. TOBIN 
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the 
Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States 
Court of Veterans Appeals.  This remand is in the nature of a 
preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the 
Board on the merits of your appeal.  38 C.F.R. § 20.1100(b) 
(1997).
- 2 -
