Citation Nr: 9834429	
Decision Date: 11/20/98    Archive Date: 11/24/98

DOCKET NO.  95-28 504	)	DATE
	)
	)

On appeal from the
Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office in Cheyenne, 
Wyoming


THE ISSUE

Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).


WITNESS AT HEARING ON APPEAL

Appellant


ATTORNEY FOR THE BOARD

Jean Steadman, Associate Counsel


INTRODUCTION

The veteran served on active duty from August 1966 to May 
1969 and from June 1974 to June 1975.
This matter comes before the Board of Veterans’ Appeals 
(Board) on appeal of a September 1994 rating determination by 
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office in 
Cheyenne, Wyoming. 

This case was previously before the Board in August 1997 at 
which time it was remanded for further development.  To the 
extent indicated below, those actions have been completed and 
this case is properly before the Board for review upon the 
merits.

The Board notes that the veteran was originally represented 
by The American Legion.  In September 1997, the veteran 
informed the RO that he no longer wished to be represented by 
The American Legion.  In December 1997, the veteran provided 
the RO with a new designation of service organization as his 
representative stating that he desires the Veterans of the 
Vietnam War Inc. to be his representative.  He further stated 
that if that was not possible that he wanted the Vietnam Era 
Veterans Association to represent him.  Again, if that was 
not possible, he stated that he wanted the Veterans of 
Foreign Wars to serve as his representative.  The veteran 
contacted the RO at a later undisclosed dated and stated the 
Veterans of Foreign Wars was unable to serve as his 
representative.  The record is unclear but it appears that he 
may have reiterated his desire to have the Veterans of the 
Vietnam War Inc. serve as his representative.  Due to the 
confusion as to the representative of record, the Board 
informed the veteran in October 1998, that only one 
organization could be designated and that clarification was 
needed.  The Board noted that if the veteran did not respond, 
it would assume that the veteran no longer sought 
representation.  The notice to the veteran was returned as 
not deliverable and the Board has not heard from the veteran.  
Accordingly, since there is no clear designation of a 
representative, the Board will proceed with the appeal 
without referral to a representative.  



CONTENTIONS OF APPELLANT ON APPEAL

The veteran contends that the RO erred in not granting the 
benefit sought.  The veteran contend that his post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) originated in service.  He maintains 
that his Vietnam experiences caused his PTSD. 




DECISION OF THE BOARD

The Board, in accordance with the provisions of 38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 7104 (West 1991 & Supp. 1998), has reviewed and considered 
all of the evidence and material of record in the veteran's 
claims file.  Based on its review of the relevant evidence in 
this matter, and for the following reasons and bases, it is 
the decision of the Board that
the preponderance of the evidence is against the claim for 
service connection for PTSD. 


FINDINGS OF FACT

1.  All relevant evidence necessary for an equitable 
disposition of this claim has been obtained by the RO, to the 
extent possible.

2.  The veteran's accounts of stressors in service are 
uncorroborated by objective evidence.


CONCLUSION OF LAW

PTSD was not incurred in service. 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 1110, 1154, 
5107 (West 1991); 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (1998).


REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDINGS AND CONCLUSION

Initially, the Board finds that the veteran’s claim is well 
grounded in accordance with 38 U.S.C.A. § 5107 (West 1991) in 
that his claim is plausible based upon the clinical evidence 
of record and the evidentiary assertions provided by the 
veteran that are within the competence of lay party.  Murphy 
v. Derwinski, 1 Vet. App. 78 (1990);  King v. Brown, 5 Vet. 
App. 19 (1993).  Once it has been determined that a claim is 
well grounded, VA has a statutory duty to assist the veteran 
in the development of evidence pertinent to that claim.  
38 U.S.C.A. § 5107.

Service connection may be established for disability 
resulting from personal injury suffered or disease contracted 
in line of duty, or for aggravation of a pre-existing injury 
suffered or disease contracted in line of duty.  38 U.S.C.A. 
§ 1131; 38 C.F.R. § 3.303 (1998).  Regulations also provide 
that service connection may be granted for any disease 
diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including 
that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was 
incurred in service. 38 C.F.R. § 3.303(d).  

The United States Court of Veterans Appeals (Court) has held 
that in order to establish service connection, there must be 
evidence of both a service-connected disease or injury and a 
present disability which is attributable to such disease or 
injury.  Rabideau v. Derwinski, 2 Vet. App. 141, 143 (1992).  

Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence 
establishing a clear diagnosis of the condition, credible 
supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor 
actually occurred, and a link between current symptomatology 
and the claimed in-service stressor.  If the claimed stressor 
is related to combat, service department evidence that the 
veteran was awarded the Purple Heart, Combat Infantryman 
Badge, or similar combat citation will be accepted, in the 
absence of evidence to the contrary, as conclusive evidence 
of the claimed in-service stressor.  38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f).  

In the case of Zarycki v. Brown, the Court set forth the 
framework for establishing the presence of a recognizable 
stressor, which is the essential prerequisite to support the 
diagnosis of PTSD.  The Court analysis divides into two major 
components:  the first component involves the evidence 
required to demonstrate the existence of an alleged stressful 
event; the second involves a determination as to whether the 
stressful event is of the quality required to support the 
diagnosis of PTSD.

With regard to the first component of the Court analysis, 
under 38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b), 38 C.F.R. § 3.304, and the 
applicable VA’s Manual 21-1 provisions, the evidence 
necessary to establish the occurrence of a recognizable 
stressor during service to support a claim of entitlement to 
service connection for PTSD will vary depending on whether or 
not the veteran “engaged in combat with the enemy.”  See 
Hayes v. Brown, 5 Vet.App. 60 (1993).  Whether or not a 
veteran “engaged in combat with the enemy” must be 
determined through recognized military citations or other 
service department evidence.  In other words, the claimant’s 
assertions that he “engaged in combat with the enemy” are 
not sufficient, by themselves, to establish this fact.  The 
record must first contain recognized military citations or 
other supportive evidence to establish that he “engaged in 
combat with the enemy.”  If the determination with respect 
to this step is affirmative, then (and only then), a second 
step requires that the veteran’s lay testimony regarding 
claimed stressors must be accepted as conclusive as to their 
actual occurrence and no further development or corroborative 
evidence will be required, provided that the veteran’s 
testimony is found to be “satisfactory,” e.g., credible, 
and “consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or 
hardships of such service.”  Zarycki at 98.

The Court recently refined it’s reasoning in Fossie v. West, 
No. 96-1695 (U.S. Vet. App. Oct. 30, 1998), when it held that 
if the veteran did not receive any of the recognized military 
citations which indicate combat pursuant to 38 C.F.R. 
§ 3.304(f) and no evidence of combat has been presented by 
the veteran, the Board may properly conclude that the veteran 
did not engage in combat and the Board is not required, 
pursuant to 38 U.S.C.A. § 1154(b), to accept his lay 
testimony as conclusive evidence of the presence of in-
service stressors.

A review of the veteran’s service medical records are 
negative or treatment or complaints of PTSD.  During the 
veteran’s May 1969 discharge examination, he was 
psychiatrically evaluated as normal.  The veteran reenlisted 
in June 1974 with no psychiatric complaints.  During the 
veteran’s June 1975 discharge examination, he was again 
psychiatrically evaluated as normal.

The veteran’s VA DD Form 214 reveals that the veteran served 
as a general warehouseman in service.  He served in Vietnam 
and was awarded the National Defense Service Medal, Vietnam 
Service Medal W/3*, Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal 
(1960), Presidential Unit Citation, Expert Badge (M-14), and 
Good Conduct Medal.  

Records from the Wyoming State Hospital in August 1983 
reflect diagnoses of alcohol dependence, amphetamine or 
similarly acting sympathomimetic dependence, cocaine abuse, 
and antisocial personality.  

Of record is a November 1990 psychological examination 
performed while the veteran was incarcerated.  He reported 
that he was in Vietnam for eighteen months and was wounded in 
the leg with shrapnel.  He stated that he received three 
presidential citations.  He refused to further elaborate on 
his Vietnam experiences.    After examination, the examiner 
concluded that the veteran seemed to be suffering from PTSD 
associated with Vietnam.  He further, noted that the veteran 
was a violent individual who was essentially anti-social.

The veteran filed his original claim for service connection 
for “bad nerves” in March 1994.  In a May 1994 statement to 
the RO, the veteran stated that he saw bodies blown apart and 
body bags.  He was unclear as to the specific circumstances 
surrounding his stressful experiences.

In August 1994, the veteran underwent VA examination for 
PTSD.  He reported that he had been in the Marines from 1966 
to 1969.  He reenlisted in 1974 and was discharged eleven 
months later due to an inability to adapt.  He stated that he 
spent eighteen months in Vietnam.  He was a warehouseman but 
stated that he spent most of his time as a combat engineer 
and sniper.  He stated that he provided support to other 
groups and participated in road sweeps looking for mines.  He 
stated that he was a sniper on the lines at night but he was 
unable to elaborate on his responsibilities.  He reported 
that his unit underwent daily rocket attacks and artillery 
attacks near Dong Ha.  He reported that he lost many partners 
but could not remember any specific details.  The examiner 
noted that the veteran was evasive about his social history 
after service but noted that the veteran had spent all but 
three or four years since 1976 in various penal institutions.

The veteran initially denied mental health treatment but 
acknowledged that he took  illegally acquired Valium to 
alleviate his sleep problems and nightmares.  He stated that 
his most prominent symptom of PTSD was a recurrent nightmare 
which he described as a “death dream.”  He stated that 
sometimes he would go months without the dream and at other 
times it would occur as often as three times a week.  He 
reported that loud noises scared him and that he occasionally 
became anxious without realizing why.  He reported that he 
was presently incarcerated at the Wyoming penitentiary and 
that his day was fairly regimented.

After examination, the examiner noted that the veteran 
presented with a long history of antisocial activities and 
multiple incarcerations.  The examiner opined that the 
veteran’s problems were due to his antisocial personality 
with aggressive features.  He noted a probable significant 
history of alcohol abuse but noted that it had been curtailed 
in prison.  The examiner commented that he could not put much 
stock in the veteran’s history, either his military 
experiences or his current symptomatology.  The examiner 
noted that he felt that the veteran was likely to falsify 
information or stretch the truth if he felt that it was to 
his best advantage.  The examiner further, explained that 
even if the rocket attack stressors were confirmed, that the 
veteran’s stressors were not at the level of acuity usually 
associated with PTSD.  Because he could not confirm the 
symptomatology of PTSD, the examiner did not provide a 
diagnosis of PTSD.

In a September 1994 rating decision, the RO denied 
entitlement to service connection for PTSD.  The veteran 
filed his notice of disagreement (NOD) in May 1995 and 
perfected his appeal in June 1995.  Incorporated his NOD, was 
a statement of stressful events that the veteran experienced 
in Vietnam.  He recalled an occasion where a school friend 
was killed.  He described occasions where snipers fired upon 
the chow hall.  He stated that due to his experiences in 
Vietnam, he was nervous and sensitive to loud noises.

During the veteran’s December 1995 RO hearing, he testified 
that he was attached to the 3rd Engineer Battalion, Charlie 
Company in Da Nang and Dong Ha.  He stated that his unit was 
shelled every day in Dong Ha.  He described events such as 
snipers firing upon the chow hall.  He reported that a school 
friend was killed in Vietnam.  He stated that while his 
military occupational specialty (MOS) was a warehouseman, he 
actually performed many duties such as truck driver and 
ammunitions supply.  He described nightmares and stated that 
he woke up sweating.  He stated that he was presently unable 
to be in groups of people.  He had been prescribed Valium for 
his general anxiety and nightmares.  He stated that a prison 
psychologist had diagnosed him with PTSD.  He stated that he 
was not receiving any current treatment for his PTSD.

In May 1996, the Hearing Officer denied entitlement to 
service connection for PTSD and the case was forwarded to the 
Board for adjudication upon the merits.  In August 1997, the 
Board remanded the case to the RO for further development, 
including verification of the veteran’s alleged Vietnam 
stressors.

In September 1997, the veteran reiterated his stressful 
events in a statement to the RO.  He recalled an occasion 
where he instructed two soldiers to seek cover in a trench 
only to be buried alive minutes later.  He stated that one of 
the soldiers was severely injured.

Also submitted in support of his claims, are private medical 
records from July 1983 to October 1997 which reveal treatment 
for various disabilities.  After a psychological examination 
in August 1983, no psychiatric diagnoses were determined.  In 
August 1994, the veteran complained of anxiety.  In December 
1994, the examiner noted that the veteran had a diagnosis of 
PTSD.  In December 1995, the veteran was provided Valium for 
PTSD.  In May 1996, the veteran complained of anxiety attacks 
and nightmares.

In September 1997 the Environmental Support Group (ESG), now 
the U.S. Armed Service Center for Research of Unit Records 
(USACRUR) provided command chronologies for the 3rd Engineer 
Battalion from February 1967 to May 1967.  The records did 
not verify any of the veteran’s claimed stressors.

To summarize, the veteran maintains that during service he 
experienced stressful events in Vietnam that led to PTSD.  He 
asserts that at present his anxiety and nightmares are 
related to service.  A review of the evidence of record 
indicates that the veteran was initially trained as a general 
warehouseman.  He asserted that while assigned to Vietnam, he 
served as a sniper.  He was awarded the Republic of Vietnam 
Campaign Medal, the Vietnam Service Medal, and National 
Defense Service Medal.  He was also awarded the Presidential 
Unit Citation, Expert Badge, and Good Conduct Medal.  These 
medals were awarded for achievement and not for valor.  The 
evidence does not indicate that he was awarded the Purple 
Heart or other such combat citation, and the Board finds that 
there is no other supportive evidence of record that the 
veteran engaged in combat.  Under such circumstances, the 
Board must make the determination if the veteran had a 
recognizable stressor. See Zarycki, 6 Vet. App. 91.

In this regard, the Board has noted that the veteran has made 
a number of statements regarding his service in Vietnam, and 
the stressful incidents therein.  In Dizoglio v. Brown, 9 
Vet. App. 163, 166 (1996), the Court held that "credible 
supporting evidence" required by 38 C.F.R. § 3.304 (f) means 
that the veteran's testimony, by itself, cannot as a matter 
of law, establish the occurrence of a non-combat stressor. 
Instead, the record must contain evidence which corroborates 
the veteran's testimony as to the occurrence of the claimed 
stressors.  Thus, the Board will now consider each of the 
incidents as reported by the veteran and determine if the 
required credible supporting evidence is present.

During a November 1990 private psychological examination, the 
veteran reported that he was wounded in the leg with shrapnel 
and was awarded three presidential citations.  He refused to 
further elaborate on his Vietnam experiences.

In a May 1994 statement, the veteran reported seeing bodies 
blown apart and body bags.  He was examined for compensation 
purposes by the VA in August 1994.  On psychiatric 
examination, he indicated that he spent most of his time as a 
sniper and combat engineer.  He was unable to elaborate on 
his sniper responsibilities.  He stated that he participated 
in mine sweeps.  He also reported that his unit experienced 
daily rocket attacks.  He reported that he had lost many 
partners but was unable to relate any specific details.

He submitted a statement in May 1995 along with his NOD 
wherein he described an occasion when he instructed two 
recruits to take cover in a trench only to have them buried 
alive moments later.  One soldier was badly injured.  He 
described occasions when the chow hall was fired upon by 
enemy snipers.  He also reported that one of his school 
friends joined him and was shortly thereafter killed.  He 
reported that his friend’s name was John Killen.

The veteran presented testimony in December 1995.  At the RO 
hearing, he stated that he was a warehouseman but served in 
many capacities such as truck driver and ammunitions supply 
man.  When pressed for specifics as to dates, places, or 
names, the veteran did not provide such specifics.

The veteran provided a statement in September 1997, at which 
time he reiterated his story of the two young recruits being 
buried alive.  He described his experiences in fox holes and 
trenches during the monsoon season.  He stated that his unit 
was shelled upon about three or four times a day and that 
snipers regularly fired upon the chow hall.  He recalled his 
friend dying and described an occasion when he was supposed 
to ride in a supply plane that was full of leaking body bags.

The veteran has reported a number of alleged stressful 
incidents.  However, on repeated occasions, he was given 
opportunities to provide either corroborating evidence or 
specific information with regard to the stressors. At his 
December 1995 hearing, he failed to give any specifics, 
despite questioning by the hearing officer and his 
representative.  As previously noted, the veteran's 
testimony, by itself, cannot establish the occurrence of a 
stressor when the veteran is not shown to have been in 
combat. See Dizoglio, 9 Vet. App. 163.

Therefore, the Board finds that the veteran was assigned to 
Vietnam, and was exposed to danger.  However, there is no 
corroboration in the available records that the veteran was 
exposed to a recognizable stressor.  Having concluded that 
the required credible supporting evidence of a stressor is 
not present, the Board finds that service connection for PTSD 
is not appropriate.  In the absence of verified stressors in 
service, it would serve no useful appellate purpose to remand 
the case for a medical examination, pursuant to the August 
1997 Board remand, to consider the relationship between 
unverified stressors and any post service symptomatology.

In reaching this determination, the Board has considered the 
statements made in November 1990 by a private examiner 
concluding that PTSD caused by service was present.  This 
determination was made based on the history given by the 
veteran. However, unenhanced reports of a history provided by 
a medical examiner do not constitute probative evidence.  See 
LeShore v. Brown, 8 Vet. App. 406 (1995). Hence, such 
recitation of the veteran's stressors, in the absence of any 
objective verification, cannot serve as the basis of a grant 
of service connection for PTSD. See Moreau v. Brown, 9 Vet. 
App. 389 (1996).


ORDER

Service connection for PTSD is denied.


		
	V. L. Jordan
	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals

NOTICE OF APPELLATE RIGHTS:  Under 38 U.S.C.A. § 7266 (West 
1991 &  Supp. 1998), a decision of the Board of Veterans' 
Appeals granting less than the complete benefit, or benefits, 
sought on appeal is appealable to the United States Court of 
Veterans Appeals within 120 days from the date of mailing of 
notice of the decision, provided that a Notice of 
Disagreement concerning an issue which was before the Board 
was filed with the agency of original jurisdiction on or 
after November 18, 1988.  Veterans' Judicial Review Act, 
Pub. L. No. 100-687, § 402, 102 Stat. 4105, 4122 (1988).  The 
date which appears on the face of this decision constitutes 
the date of mailing and the copy of this decision which you 
have received is your notice of the action taken on your 
appeal by the Board of Veterans' Appeals.
- 2 -
