#Issue#
Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

#Service History#
The appellant had active air service from June 1968 to March 1969, with time lost by reason of being absent without leave (AWOL) from duty in December 1968 and January 1969.

#Procedural History#
This appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) arises from rating decisions in April 1996 and May 1997 by the Waco, Texas, Regional Office (RO) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

#Reasoning#
In a May 2005 response to a VA request for information, the Air Force Office of Special Investigations reported that no records were found to confirm either incident.

#Evidential Support#
With regard to the first claimed in-service stressor, the appellant has not submitted any supporting evidence, such as an affidavit by an eyewitness or by some other person claiming to have personal knowledge of the appellant's alleged abuse in December 1968 by the military prison guards, nor has he or his representative identified any existing evidence which would tend to support or corroborate the appellant's statements concerning such alleged abuse.

#Evidential Support#
With regard to the appellant's second claimed in-service stressor arising out of an alleged collision of two military jeeps, VA requested that the U.S. Army and Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC) attempt by research of official military records to verify that in January 1969 a collision with personal injuries of two Air Force jeeps occurred in Alabama.

#Evidential Support#
In March 2006, the JSRRC reported to VA that after extensive research, the jeep accident as described by the appellant could not be documented.

#Reasoning#
No supporting evidence whatsoever having been presented or identified, there is no credible evidence that the appellant's second claimed in- service stressor occurred.

#Reasoning#
There is no such credible supporting evidence in this case of the occurrence of either of the appellant's two claimed in-service stressors.

#Outcome#
Entitlement to service connection for post-traumatic stress disorder is denied.

