#Issue#
Entitlement to service connection for a psychiatric disability, to include posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression/alcoholism.

#Service History#
The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from July 1961 to July 1963.

#Procedural History#
This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from January 2006 and November 2007 rating decisions of the Houston, Texas, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) which, respectively, denied service connection for depression/alcoholism and for PTSD.

#Outcome#
While the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD are not met, it is reasonably shown that the Veteran has a depressive disorder which had its onset in service; an alcohol abuse disability is not shown during the pendency of this claim.

#Evidential Support#
The record shows that the Veteran has a diagnosis of recurring depressive disorder.

#Evidential Support#
The "negative" evidence regarding a diagnosis of PTSD consists of opinions by VA psychologists in October 2010 (that the CMC stressor did not qualify as a tramatic event) and January 2012 (that the CMC stressor qualified as a traumatic event; however, there was no persistent reexperiencing of the event or persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the trauma or numbing of general responsiveness).

#Reasoning#
As the opinion is accompanied by expression of a more complete awareness of the Veteran's medical history and clinical data, discusses all DSM-IV criteria necessary for a diagnosis of PTSD, includes a detailed explanation of the rationale for the opinion (identifying the specific symptoms found lacking for a diagnosis of PTSD), and the examiner comments on the other opinions already of record, the Board finds this opinion more probative than the essentially bare conclusions of the April 2006 and May 2006 statements from the Veteran's private physicians.

#Reasoning#
The examiner concluded that the Veteran does not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD because he is not persistently re-experiencing the event and he does not have persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the "trauma" or numbing of general responsiveness.

#Reasoning#
In summary, the preponderance of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has PTSD.

#Evidential Support#
However, undisputed evidence reflects he has been sober since 1980, i.e. for decades prior to his instant claim of service connection.

