round 0, index 69: 
Service connection for PTSD is granted.

round 1, index 68: 
Therefore, resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the veteran, the Board concludes that service connection for PTSD is warranted.

round 2, index 5: 
The veteran is a combat veteran who served in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era, and he has claimed combat stressors that are credible, and consistent with the circumstances, conditions and hardships of his service. 3.

round 3, index 67: 
The Board then finds that the evidence as to whether the veteran has PTSD or not is in relative equipoise.

round 4, index 66: 
As clearly shown in the above discussion of the pertinent competent evidence of record, several mental health experts have said that the veteran does not meet the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD, while other mental health experts, particularly those who have treated the veteran during his multiple psychiatric hospitalizations, have indicated that the veteran indeed suffers from PTSD.

round 5, index 65: 
Insofar as the remaining criteria set forth in ยง 3.304(f) for a grant of service connection for PTSD have been met, the answer to this question will determine whether the benefits sought on appeal are warranted in this case.

round 6, index 63: 
As noted above, the record shows that the veteran is a combat veteran, who has reported stressful inservice experiences, and he has had multiple hospitalizations in which he has reported symptoms arising from those inservice experiences.

round 7, index 62: 
Depression, not otherwise specified, and PTSD, chronic, were diagnosed, and the veteran was eventually discharged after the exacerbation of his symptoms was controlled by medication and mental health therapy.

round 8, index 61: 
He also reported sadness, insomnia and isolation tendencies, and said that he was mad at a helicopter that had flown over his house.

round 9, index 60: 
The veteran complained of ideas of aggression, fear of losing control of his aggressive impulses, anhedonia, anorexia, "command-type" auditory hallucinations telling him to kill himself and to "help us," helicopter sounds and nightmares about an incident in Vietnam in which he was hurt by a mine-like weapon.

round 10, index 14: 
When, after consideration of all the evidence of record, there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter or a reasonable doubt arises regarding service origin, the degree of disability or any other point, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.

round 11, index 15: 
By reasonable doubt is meant one which exists because of an approximate balance of the positive and the negative evidence which does not satisfactorily prove or disprove the claim.

round 12, index 16: 
It is a substantial doubt and one within the range of probability, as distinguished from pure speculation or remote possibility.

round 13, index 59: 
According to this report, the veteran was admitted due to his having become increasingly irritable, destructive and aggressive.

round 14, index 17: 
The reasonable doubt doctrine is also applicable even in the absence of official records, particularly if the basic incident allegedly arose under combat, or similarly strenuous conditions, and is consistent with the probable results of such known hardships.

round 15, index 18: 
The "benefit of the doubt doctrine" requires a veteran only to demonstrate that there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence in order to prevail;

round 16, index 19: 
entitlement need not be established beyond a reasonable doubt, by clear and convincing evidence or by a fair preponderance of the evidence.

round 17, index 50: 
The theme of war and death, however, appeared to occupy most of his conscious thinking, but these thoughts were seldom acknowledged for fear of disorganization.

round 18, index 13: 
If the evidence establishes that the veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the claimed stressor is related to that combat, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided that the claimed stressor is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of the veteran's service, the veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed stressor.

round 19, index 20: 
In other words, the preponderance of the evidence must be against the claim for benefits to be denied.

round 20, index 21: 
When a veteran seeks benefits and the evidence is in relative equipoise, the law dictates that the veteran prevails.

round 21, index 22: 
This "unique standard of proof" is in keeping with the high esteem in which our nation holds those who have served in the Armed Services.

round 22, index 23: 
It is in recognition of our debt to our veterans that society has, through legislation, taken upon itself the risk of error when, in determining whether a veteran is entitled to benefits, there is an "approximate balance of positive and negative evidence."

round 23, index 24: 
By tradition and by statute, the benefit of the doubt belongs to the veteran.

round 24, index 3: 
It was remanded by the Board for additional development in December 1996, and is now back at the Board.

round 25, index 4: 
All evidence necessary for an equitable disposition of the matter on appeal has been obtained and developed by the agency of original jurisdiction.

round 26, index 1: 
He served in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era, and was awarded the Combat Infantry Badge.

round 27, index 25: 
In the present case, the veteran contends that he experienced traumatic events while serving in combat in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era, and that these experiences triggered the onset of his PTSD, which has caused industrial and social impairment, and has prompted multiple VA psychiatric admissions throughout the years.

round 28, index 9: 
Generally, a well-grounded claim is a "plausible claim, one which is meritorious on its own or capable of substantiation."

round 29, index 0: 
The veteran served on active duty from October 1968 to October 1970.

round 30, index 2: 
This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 1990 confirmed rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) San Juan, Puerto Rico, Regional Office (RO), which denied a claim of entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

round 31, index 30: 
Id.

round 32, index 64: 
A question has arisen as to whether he indeed suffers from PTSD.

round 33, index 70: 
JEFF MARTIN	Member, Board of Veterans' Appeals - 8 -- 1 -

round 34, index 38: 
In August 1992, the veteran was again examined by VA mental health specialists, and, while a depressive disorder and alcohol dependence, in remission, were again diagnosed, it was again noted that the veteran complained of recalling inservice stressful events, such as witnessing a fellow soldier who fell from a helicopter, and killing four

round 35, index 10: 
In general, service connection may be established for a disability if it is shown that the disability resulted from disease or injury that was incurred in or aggravated by service.

round 36, index 11: 
Service connection may also be granted for any disease or injury diagnosed after discharge when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease or injury was incurred in service.

round 37, index 8: 
Initially, the Board notes that every claimant seeking entitlement to service connection has the initial burden of submitting a claim that is well grounded.

round 38, index 44: 
He acknowledged that at times his behavior became unintelligible to himself and others, since he appeared to behave as if he were still in the war.

round 39, index 45: 
The veteran was not able to elaborate much on this, and only discussed an instance in which he appeared to have a visual hallucination, but his wife did discuss various instances in which he appeared to have been experiencing flashbacks.

round 40, index 7: 
Resolving reasonable doubt in favor of the veteran, service connection for PTSD is warranted.

round 41, index 46: 
For example, she said that, on two occasions, he had requested that his wife run over an individual because "he was a Vietnamese."

round 42, index 47: 
At those times, he would usually tear off a piece of his clothing, would wrap it around his head, and would then start referring to himself as a soldier who had been "commanded to destroy the enemy."

round 43, index 12: 
Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. ยง 4.125(a); a link, established by medical evidence, between the current symptoms and an inservice stressor; and credible supporting evidence that the claimed inservice stressor occurred.

round 44, index 29: 
The Board also notes that the facts relevant to this appeal have been properly developed, and that VA's obligation to assist the veteran in the development of his claim has been fully satisfied.

round 45, index 48: 
When his spouse refused to comply with his requests, he would become angry and would start screaming at her, saying that she should follow orders, "or all of them would die."

round 46, index 49: 
According to the above report, the veteran's anxiety level appeared to be moderate to severe, but he was in contact with reality and there was no apparent evidence of a perceptual and/or thought disorder.

round 47, index 37: 
The subscribing examiners listed depressive disorder, not otherwise specified, and substance (alcohol) abuse, by record, as the diagnoses in Axis I, and explained that they had found no evidence to make a diagnosis of PTSD, although the veteran did show "some features of the condition, but this is not enough to comply with DSM-III diagnostic requirements."

round 48, index 36: 
The veteran was examined, but it was noted that his thought content dealt mostly with "description of some depressive symptomatology," although the veteran did describe having memories from Vietnam, "becoming rather depressed when he starts thinking about this, unable to sleep, and also ... irritable and sometimes losing control of his impulses."

round 49, index 6: 
The competent evidence as to whether a diagnosis of PTSD is warranted or not in the present case is in relative equipoise.

round 50, index 51: 
In the examiner's opinion, "[t]he result of this evaluation supports the diagnosis of P[TSD]."

round 51, index 52: 
In addition to the above, the vast majority of the multiple VA psychiatric admissions of the veteran throughout the years have included a diagnosis of PTSD.

round 52, index 33: 
He also reported terrifying nightmares, which would wake him up, as well as homicidal and suicidal ideations, all having started shortly after service.

round 53, index 54: 
He was noted to be sad, depressed, with low self-esteem, with accusatory ideations, guilt feelings and death wishes, his main topic of concern being about Vietnam experiences and flashbacks.

round 54, index 55: 
It was noted that the veteran had attended a VA PTSD group, and that, in the subscribing physician's opinion, he was "a severely disabled veteran that is unemployable."

round 55, index 39: 
In November 1993, he was again examined by the VA psychiatrist who conducted the December 1990 psychiatric examination, but, again, it was noted that "[i]t is our opinion that this veteran's condition and symptoms do not fulfill [the] criteria for a diagnosis of P[TSD] and that his correct psychiatric diagnosis should be that of Dysthymia."

round 56, index 53: 
For instance, the Board notes that, in May 1990, the veteran had a one-day admission due to complaints of auditory hallucinations, depression, nightmares, insomnia, poor control of his impulses, suicidal ideas, anorexia, and frequent crying.

round 57, index 40: 
This psychiatrist thereafter re-examined the veteran in July 1998, and indicated that "the diagnosis will remain as stated," while the VA psychiatrist who examined the veteran in August 1992 diagnosed once again, in July 1998, a depressive disorder and alcohol abuse, in remission.

round 58, index 27: 
Therefore, there is no need to accomplish additional development to attempt to verify the claimed stressors, to which further reference will be made later in this decision.

round 59, index 31: 
The service medical records in the file reveal that, while a psychiatric disability was not diagnosed on discharge, the veteran indicated, in the report of medical history for separation purposes that he filled out and signed in September 1970, that he had had, or currently had, trouble sleeping, as well as nervous troubles of some sort.

