round 0, index 76: 
A complete rationale for all opinions expressed must be provided.

round 1, index 77: 
The copy of the examination report and all completed test reports should thereafter be associated with the claims folder.

round 2, index 75: 
Further, in line with the M21-1 provisions, the examiner is requested to provide detailed medical analysis and interpretation of the diagnoses found present on examination in light of all the evidence of record for the purpose of addressing whether any behavioral changes that occurred at or close in time to the alleged rape and sexual harassment incidents could possibly indicate the occurrence of an alleged in-service stressor.

round 3, index 78: 
The appellant must be given adequate notice of any requested examination, which includes advising her of the consequences of failure to report for a scheduled examination.

round 4, index 97: 
This remand is in the nature of a preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the Board on the merits of your appeal.

round 5, index 96: 
MICHELLE L. KANE	Acting Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' AppealsUnder 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 2002), only a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.

round 6, index 94: 
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the Board of Veterans' Appeals or by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims for additional development or other appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.

round 7, index 95: 
In addition, VBA's Adjudication Procedure Manual, M21-1, Part IV, directs the ROs to provide expeditious handling of all cases that have been remanded by the Board and the Court.

round 8, index 92: 
The appellant has the right to submit additional evidence and argument on the matter or matters the Board has remanded to the RO.

round 9, index 74: 
In addition, the examiner must comment on the approximate date of onset and etiology of any diagnosed psychiatric disorder as shown by the evidence of record, and in so doing, the examiner should attempt to reconcile the multiple psychiatric diagnoses and/or assessments of record based on his/her review of all of the evidence of record, particularly with respect to prior diagnoses of PTSD.

round 10, index 73: 
If a diagnosis of PTSD is deemed appropriate, the examiner should specify (1) whether the alleged stressor found to be established by the record was sufficient to produce PTSD; and (2) whether there is a link between the current PTSD-symptomatology and the in-service stressor found to be established by the record and found sufficient to produce PTSD by the examiner.

round 11, index 93: 
This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment by the RO.

round 12, index 72: 
A multiaxial evaluation based on the current DSM-IV diagnostic criteria is required.

round 13, index 91: 
Thereafter, subject to current appellate procedures, the case should be returned to the Board for further appellate consideration, if appropriate.

round 14, index 38: 
However, the Board reviewed the documents in the appellant's 201 file, which are of record, and found that in the latter half of 1982 while stationed at the Walter Reed Army Medical

round 15, index 70: 
The examiner should determine the true diagnoses of any currently manifested psychiatric disorder(s).

round 16, index 67: 
Upon completion of the above, the RO should schedule a comprehensive VA psychiatric examination to determine the diagnoses of all psychiatric disorders that are present.

round 17, index 90: 
The RO should then allow the appellant an appropriate period of time for response.

round 18, index 69: 
The claims folder and a copy of this remand must be provided to the examiner prior to the examination.

round 19, index 55: 
All records received in response to the request should be associated with the claims folder.

round 20, index 68: 
A psychiatrist who has not previously examined, evaluated or treated the appellant, if feasible, should conduct this examination.

round 21, index 58: 
For any VA or other Federal department or agency records, the RO should continue its efforts to obtain any records while the case is under development on remand until it becomes reasonably certain that such records cannot be obtained because they do not exist or until it becomes reasonably certain that further efforts to obtain records from the such sources would be futile.

round 22, index 54: 
The RO should proceed with alternative search efforts for any medical records that may have been transferred to another medical facility or retired.

round 23, index 66: 
The RO should also indicate whether any behavioral changes that occurred at or close in time to the alleged incidents could possibly indicate the occurrence of a stressor and if so should decide whether this evidence needs interpretation by a clinician. 5.

round 24, index 56: 
The RO should proceed with all reasonable follow-up referrals that may be indicated by the inquiry.

round 25, index 57: 
All attempts to obtain records which are ultimately not obtained should be documented, and in accordance with the VCAA and implementing regulations published in August 2001, the RO should notify the appellant of the records it was unable to obtain, briefly explain the efforts made to obtain such records, and describe any further action that the RO will take to obtain such records.

round 26, index 80: 
A copy of all notifications must be associated with the claims folder.

round 27, index 53: 
With regard to any private medical treatment, if identified as such, after first providing her appropriate releases to obtain such records (VA Form 21-4142), attempts to secure copies of records pertaining to any indicated private physicians and/or facilities should be undertaken.

round 28, index 79: 
If she fails to report for an examination, this fact should be documented in the claims folder.

round 29, index 52: 
If she identifies medical treatment and provides specific dates, all VA records identified in this manner that have not already been associated with the claims file should be obtained pursuant to established procedures.

round 30, index 59: 
In addition, the RO should contact the appellant and inform her that may submit any other corroborating evidence she may have pertaining to alleged rape and sexual harassment incidents experienced during service.

round 31, index 39: 
Center (WRAMC), she received a negative performance evaluation (compared with her other evaluations) as well as non-judicial punishment involving a dispute with a superior officer over an order she refused to obey.

round 32, index 0: 
The appellant served on active duty from November 1981 to November 1984, and from January 1991 to April 1991.

round 33, index 1: 
This case comes to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (the Board) on appeal from an October 1995 rating decision of the St.

round 34, index 2: 
Petersburg, Florida, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

round 35, index 3: 
The RO in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, presently has jurisdiction over this case.

round 36, index 60: 
The RO should inform her that she may submit any other evidence to verify her alleged stressors from military as well as nonmilitary sources.

round 37, index 89: 
The SSOC should provide the veteran citation to 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

round 38, index 37: 
In this particular case, the RO determined in its November 2002 supplemental statement of the case that review of the appellant's service personnel records (201 file) would be "useless" because she failed to provide more specific and detailed information concerning her alleged stressors.

round 39, index 50: 
In particular, this notice should advise the appellant that she may submit any corroborating lay and/or medical evidence she may have pertaining to treatment for her PTSD symptoms.

round 40, index 19: 
Board believes that the RO should have the appellant re-examined by VA in order to determine whether she has a DSM-IV diagnosis of PTSD based on her reported stressors and a complete review of all the evidence in the claims file.

round 41, index 18: 
As additional evidentiary development will be required, to include stressor-verification development, the

round 42, index 20: 
In the Board's view, the appellate record does not at this time contain sufficient medical evidence to decide this claim.

round 43, index 61: 
The RO should assist the appellant in obtaining such evidence, as appropriate.

round 44, index 49: 
The RO must review the claims file and ensure that all notification and development action required by the VCAA is completed under 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5102, 5103, 5103A, and 5107 (West 2002), including written notice of the evidence, if any, the appellant is expected to provide in support of the claim and the evidence, if any, that the RO will obtain for her.

round 45, index 88: 
The supplemental statement of the case must contain notice of all relevant actions taken on this claim, to include a summary of the evidence and applicable law and regulations considered pertinent to the issues currently on appeal.

round 46, index 51: 
The RO should assist the appellant in obtaining any identified evidence, as appropriate.

round 47, index 64: 
In rendering this determination, the attention of the RO is directed to the law cited in the discussion above.

round 48, index 65: 
If official service records or alternative records discussed in M21-1, Part III, Sec. 5.14 corroborate the appellant's allegations, the RO should specify that information.

round 49, index 82: 
This action should include notifying the appellant of her right to submit additional evidence or argument regarding the merits of this claim.

round 50, index 87: 
If the benefit sought on appeal remains denied, the RO should provide the appellant and her representative an adequate supplemental statement of the case.

round 51, index 4: 
No further action will be taken with regard to the appellant's request for a hearing before the Board.

round 52, index 86: 
The RO should also carefully consider the benefit of the doubt rule, and in this regard, if the evidence is not in equipoise the RO should explain why.

round 53, index 63: 
Following the above, the RO must make a specific factual determination, based upon the complete record, with respect to whether one or more of the appellant's stressors occurred as she claims.

round 54, index 29: 
Specifically, additional evidentiary development is required, to include stressor-

round 55, index 81: 
In addition, the RO should take all other proper measures to ensure full and complete compliance with the duty-to-notify and duty-to-assist provisions of the VCAA that are specifically germane to the claim on appeal, service connection for PTSD based on personal assault.

round 56, index 62: 
In connection with this development, the RO should ensure that all appropriate special development procedures mandated by M21-1, Section 5.14 and 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3) for verification of a non-combat stressor is fully accomplished and documented in the claims folder, to include issuance of the special development letter to the appellant advising her of the steps necessary to verify her non-combat stressors.

round 57, index 83: 
After completion of the above, the RO should readjudicate the issue of service connection for PTSD based on personal assault with consideration given to all of the evidence of record, including any additional medical evidence obtained by the RO pursuant to this REMAND.

round 58, index 48: 
Accordingly, although the Board sincerely regrets the additional delay, the case is REMANDED for the following:

round 59, index 71: 
The diagnosis(es) must be based on examination findings, all available medical records, complete review of comprehensive testing for PTSD, and any special testing deemed appropriate.

