round 0, index 45: 
The rationale for all opinions expressed should also be provided.  6.

round 1, index 46: 
After all appropriate development has been completed, the AMC or the RO should readjudicate the current claim on a de novo basis without reference to prior adjudications.

round 2, index 44: 
Based upon the interview with the appellant and especially upon a review of the relevant historical material in the claims file, the VA psychiatric examiner should determine the correct current psychiatric diagnosis(es); for each such current psychiatric diagnosis, the examiner should also state whether or not that disorder is etiologically related to service (and if PTSD is diagnosed, whether it is etiologically related to any verified event occurring in service) or was permanently worsened by any such verified in-service event.

round 3, index 47: 
As part of this action, the AMC or the RO should determine whether or not presumptive service connection pursuant to 38 U.S.C.A. § 1112(a) and 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307 and 3.309 is warranted, fully stating the reasons and bases for this and all of its determinations with respect to the present claim.

round 4, index 48: 
If any benefits sought on appeal are not granted to the appellant's satisfaction, the appellant and his representative should be furnished an appropriate supplemental statement of the case and provided the requisite opportunity to respond.

round 5, index 43: 
The AMC or the RO should also inform the examiner of the identity of any and all in-service stressor events which are considered to be verified by the available evidence.

round 6, index 7: 
The appeal is REMANDED to the RO via the Appeals Management Center (AMC), in Washington, DC.  VA will notify you if further action is required on your part.

round 7, index 32: 
Accordingly, this appeal is remanded to the RO (via the AMC) in Washington, D.C. for the following further actions:  1.

round 8, index 42: 
The examination report should reflect that the claims file was reviewed.

round 9, index 41: 
Any indicated studies must be performed, and the claims file, including a copy of this remand, must be made available to and pertinent documents therein reviewed by the examiner.

round 10, index 40: 
Then, the appellant should be scheduled for a VA psychiatric examination (preferably by a psychiatrist) to determine the current psychiatric diagnosis(es) and its(their) relationship, if any, to the appellant's non-active-duty service.

round 11, index 39: 
If the AMC or the RO is unable to obtain a copy of any pertinent evidence identified by the appellant, it should so inform the appellant and his representative and request them to provide a copy of the outstanding evidence.  5.

round 12, index 38: 
The AMC or the RO should take appropriate steps to obtain a copy of any pertinent evidence identified but not provided by the appellant, including the postservice medical records set forth above.  4.

round 13, index 37: 
At the same time, the AMC or the RO should notify the appellant of the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3) pertaining to the type of evidence needed to support a PTSD claim based upon allegations of personal assault.  3.

round 14, index 36: 
The appellant should also specifically be requested to provide copies of his postservice psychiatric treatment records at Bellevue Hospital in New York City, at Manhattan State Hospital, and at Northeastern Florida State Hospital in Rockledge, Florida.

round 15, index 8: 
In March 1968, the appellant was hospitalized at a Metropolitan State Hospital with a diagnosis of a schizophrenic reaction, chronic undifferentiated type.

round 16, index 35: 
The AMC or the RO should also issue a letter to the appellant providing him with the notice required under 38 U.S.C. § 5103(a) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(b) pertaining to the current claim, to include notice that the appellant should submit any pertinent evidence in his possession.

round 17, index 34: 
Written verification of the actual dates of the appellant's active duty for training in 1967 should be obtained from the service department and incorporated into the claims file.

round 18, index 33: 
The AMC or the RO should request the service department to verify the exact dates of any active duty for training by the appellant during 1967 in order to determine if he had 90 or more days of active, continuous service at that time within the meaning of 38 C.F.R. § 3.307(a)(1).

round 19, index 31: 
A current VA psychiatric examination of the appellant addressing all of the outstanding medical questions presented by this appeal would be most helpful to the Board in its appellate consideration of this claim.

round 20, index 51: 
This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment.

round 21, index 54: 
This remand is in the nature of a preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the Board on the merits of your appeal.

round 22, index 49: 
In accordance with proper appellate procedures, the case should then be returned to the Board for further appellate consideration.

round 23, index 4: 
As discussed below, it is necessary to verify the exact dates of the appellant's active duty for training.

round 24, index 52: 
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the Board of Veterans' Appeals or by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims for additional development or other appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.

round 25, index 16: 
Further clarification of this matter is needed.

round 26, index 53: 
Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' AppealsUnder 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 2002), only a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.

round 27, index 50: 
The appellant need take no further action until he is otherwise informed, but he may furnish additional evidence and argument on the remanded matter while the case is in remand status.

round 28, index 2: 
and also while assigned to the U.S.S. SABLEFISH (SS303) from

round 29, index 15: 
There appears to be a substantial question remaining in this appeal as to what is the appellant's correct current psychiatric diagnosis.

round 30, index 1: 
He was a member of the U.S. Naval Reserves from April 1967 to January 1969; and he apparently served on active duty for training while attending the U.S. Naval Submarine School at New London, Connecticut, from June 18 to August 25, 1967 (a two-week course from June 19-30, 1967, and then an eight-week course from July 3 to August 25, 1967);

round 31, index 5: 
This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) from a February 2003 rating determination by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in Muskogee, Oklahoma.

round 32, index 6: 
In September 2005, the appellant testified at the RO during a video conference held before the undersigned, who was in Washington, D.C.  A transcript of that hearing is of record.

round 33, index 21: 
For example, repeated attempts to obtain a class roster have been unsuccessful.

round 34, index 30: 
Unfortunately, this opinion was based solely upon the appellant's uncorroborated verbal history rather than upon a review of the relevant medical records, and it was also apparently formed without any knowledge of the fact that the appellant had no active service.

round 35, index 20: 
In addition, he has not been able to provide any corroborating information, including specific information to enable the service department or the RO to verify that these attacks actually took place as he has described.

round 36, index 10: 
Subsequent postservice psychiatric treatments at Bellevue Hospital in New York City, at Manhattan State Hospital, and at Northeastern Florida State Hospital in Rockledge, Florida, are not documented in the current record.

round 37, index 9: 
Verification of the exact dates of active duty for training is needed in this appeal in order to determine whether or not the presumptive provisions of 38 U.S.C.A. § 1112(a) are applicable.

round 38, index 14: 
Finally, an official VA psychiatric examination of the appellant in October 2002 (conducted without a review of most of the relevant medical records) resulted in a diagnosis of schizophrenia, undifferentiated type.

round 39, index 24: 
Further appellate review of this claim would not be appropriate until this violation of the appellant's due process rights can be corrected.

round 40, index 19: 
The appellant admits that he never reported these incidents nor did he seek medical treatment for his injuries at the time.

round 41, index 25: 
The Board would also comment that a review of the appellant's medical records reveals that he has often reported similar unverified incidents throughout his life.

round 42, index 26: 
For example, the appellant reported to private mental health providers in April 1995 that he had suffered frequent physical abuse from his father and neighborhood children during his childhood.

round 43, index 11: 
These medical records are directly relevant to the present appeal.

round 44, index 3: 
The service department has verified that the appellant "had no active service or less than 90 consecutive days of active duty for training."

round 45, index 18: 
He has described episodes of hazing by his classmates which he alleges occurred every night for three weeks and were witnessed by most of the individuals in his barracks.

round 46, index 23: 
However, the appellant has not been advised of the provisions of 38 C.F.R. § 3.304(f)(3) pertaining to the type of evidence needed to support a PTSD claim based upon allegations of personal assault.

round 47, index 0: 
The appellant is not a veteran, and he has never served on active duty.

round 48, index 22: 
Although the appellant and his representative have requested that VA assist them in verifying these claimed stressor events in service, they have pointed to no concrete action which VA could take in this regard.

round 49, index 17: 
The appellant contends that he currently has PTSD as a result of repeated physical attacks on him while he was attending Submarine School.

round 50, index 13: 
A diagnosis of a drug-induced delusional disorder is also reflected by the medical evidence of record, and the appellant's current private psychiatrist has reported diagnoses of a schizoaffective disorder and PTSD.

round 51, index 29: 
It is significant, therefore, that the VA examiner in October 2002 stated as his opinion that the appellant's schizophrenic condition was exacerbated by his military service.

round 52, index 12: 
Social Security benefits were granted to the appellant in July 1995 based upon psychiatric diagnoses of a bipolar disorder, polysubstance abuse (alcohol, amphetamines, cocaine, heroin), and a depersonalization disorder.

round 53, index 28: 
These medical records also reveal that the appellant reportedly had attempted suicide on several occasions prior to his enlistment in the Reserves.

round 54, index 27: 
Similarly, in July 1995, the appellant told a private psychiatrist who examined him for the Social Security Administration that he had been beaten up by five men and left in a dumpster in June 1994.

round 55, index 0: 
The appellant is not a veteran, and he has never served on active duty.

round 56, index 0: 
The appellant is not a veteran, and he has never served on active duty.

round 57, index 0: 
The appellant is not a veteran, and he has never served on active duty.

round 58, index 0: 
The appellant is not a veteran, and he has never served on active duty.

round 59, index 0: 
The appellant is not a veteran, and he has never served on active duty.

