round 0, index 85: 
The examiner should set forth all examination findings, along with the complete rationale for each opinion expressed and conclusion reached, in a printed (typewritten) report.

round 1, index 86: 
If the veteran fails to report to the scheduled examination, the RO must obtain and associate with the claims file copy(ies) of any notice(s) of the examination sent to the veteran by the pertinent VA medical facility.

round 2, index 84: 
If a diagnosis of PTSD is deemed appropriate, the examiner must identify the specific stressor(s) underlying the diagnosis, and should comment upon the link between the current symptomatology and the veteran's verified stressor(s).

round 3, index 87: 
To help avoid future remand, the RO must ensure that all requested actions have been accomplished (to the extent possible) in compliance with this REMAND.

round 4, index 88: 
If any action is not undertaken, or is taken in a deficient manner, appropriate corrective action should be undertaken.

round 5, index 95: 
Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' AppealsUnder 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 2002), only a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.

round 6, index 94: 
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the Board of Veterans' Appeals or by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims for additional development or other appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.

round 7, index 93: 
This REMAND must be afforded expeditious treatment.

round 8, index 82: 
The examiner should make a specific determination as to whether the diagnostic criteria for PTSD are met.

round 9, index 68: 
Accordingly, this matter is hereby REMANDED to the RO, via the AMC, for the following actions:

round 10, index 92: 
The veteran need take no action until otherwise notified, but he may furnish additional evidence and/or argument during the appropriate time period.

round 11, index 80: 
The veteran's entire claims file, to include a complete copy of this REMAND, must be provided to the physician designated to examine the veteran, and the examination report should reflect consideration of the veteran's documented medical history and assertions.

round 12, index 79: 
After associating with the claims file all available records and/or responses received from each contacted entity, the RO should arrange for the veteran to undergo VA examination by a psychiatrist, at an appropriate VA medical facility.

round 13, index 81: 
All indicated tests and studies, to include psychological testing, if warranted, should be accomplished (with all findings made available to the examiner prior to the completion of his or her report), and all clinical findings should be reported in detail.

round 14, index 33: 
The veteran has asserts that between October and December 1964, he volunteered and flew missions as a door gunner in "Operation Shotgun", possibly as part of the  145th Aviation Unit.  In December 2006 statement, Mr. N, as service comrade, indicated that he had known the veteran for over 30 years, including the time they had served in Africa and Vietnam and could attest to his voluntary service as a door gunner.

round 15, index 83: 
In rendering such determination, the examiner is instructed that only the personal assault in February 1963 while stationed in Ethiopia and events associated with his voluntary service as a door gunner in Vietnam, addressed above, may be considered for the purpose of determining whether the veteran has experienced (an) in-service stressor(s) sufficient to have resulted in PTSD.

round 16, index 78: 
If any records sought are not obtained, the RO should notify the veteran and his representative of the records that were not obtained, explain the efforts taken to obtain them, and describe further action to be taken.

round 17, index 77: 
All records and responses received should be associated with the claims file.

round 18, index 76: 
If the veteran responds, the RO should assist him in obtaining any additional evidence identified by following the current procedures set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159.

round 19, index 71: 
All records and/or responses received should be associated with the claims file.

round 20, index 69: 
The RO should obtain from the Milwaukee VAMC all outstanding pertinent records of evaluation and/or treatment of the veteran's PTSD, from November 2006 to the present.

round 21, index 11: 
The Board accepts the evidence for inclusion in the record.

round 22, index 70: 
The RO must follow the procedures set forth in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(c) as regards requesting records from Federal facilities.

round 23, index 73: 
The RO should also invite the veteran to submit all pertinent evidence in his possession, and explain the type of evidence that is his ultimate responsibility to submit.

round 24, index 74: 
The RO should request that the veteran submit all evidence in his possession, and ensure that its letter meets the requirements of Dingess/Hartman, cited to above (as appropriate).

round 25, index 35: 
He was hit on the head with a rock.

round 26, index 72: 
The RO should send to the veteran and his representative a letter requesting that the veteran provide sufficient information, and if necessary, authorization to enable it to obtain any additional evidence pertinent to the claim on appeal that is not currently of record.

round 27, index 89: 
After completing the requested actions, and any additional notification and/or development deemed warranted, the RO should readjudicate the claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD, in light of all pertinent evidence (to include that submitted directly to the Board) and legal authority.

round 28, index 96: 
This remand is in the nature of a preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the Board on the merits of the appeal.

round 29, index 75: 
The RO's letter should clearly explain to the veteran that he has a full one-year period to respond (although VA may decide the claim within the one-year period).

round 30, index 23: 
In addition, the veteran has indicated that while stationed at Tan San Nhut Air Force Base (AFB) in Vietnam, the base attacked with mortar rounds on several occasions.

round 31, index 36: 
Mr. N. helped the veteran back to the post hospital and he was treated with stitches.

round 32, index 0: 
The veteran served on active duty from August 1962 to August 1965.

round 33, index 2: 
Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 1997 rating decision in which the RO denied the veteran's claim of service connection for PTSD.

round 34, index 12: 
For the reason expressed below, the matter on appeal is, again, being remanded to the RO via the Appeals Management Center (AMC), in Washington, DC.  VA will notify the appellant when further action, on his part, is required.

round 35, index 55: 
Id.

round 36, index 52: 
Accordingly, RO should arrange for the veteran to undergo VA psychiatric examination, by a physician, at an appropriate VA medical facility.

round 37, index 3: 
In January 1998, the veteran filed a notice of disagreement (NOD).

round 38, index 13: 
Unfortunately, the claims file reflects that another remand of the claim for service connection for PTSD is warranted, even though such action will, regrettably, further delay an appellate decision.

round 39, index 54: 
Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to, the illness or hospitalization of the claimant and death of an immediate family member.

round 40, index 56: 
If the appellant does not report for the scheduled examination, the RO must obtain and associate with the claims file a copy of any notice(s) of the date and time of the examination sent to him by the pertinent VA medical facility.

round 41, index 61: 
Hence, the RO must obtain all outstanding pertinent medical records from the since November 2006, following the current procedures prescribed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (2004) as regards requests for records from Federal facilities.

round 42, index 60: 
The Board emphasizes that records generated by VA facilities that may have an impact on the adjudication of a claim are considered constructively in the possession of VA adjudicators during the consideration of a claim, regardless of whether those records are physically on file.

round 43, index 62: 
The RO should also give the veteran another opportunity to provide information and/or evidence pertinent to the claim on appeal, explaining that he has a full one-year period for response.

round 44, index 59: 
Milwaukee VA Medical Center (VAMC) dated from November 1996 to November 2006.

round 45, index 65: 
However, identification of specific actions requested on remand does not relieve the RO of the responsibility to ensure full compliance with the VCAA and its implementing regulations.

round 46, index 66: 
Hence, in addition to the actions requested above, the RO should also undertake any other development and/or notification action deemed warranted by the VCAA prior to adjudicating the claim on appeal.

round 47, index 57: 
Prior to arranging for the veteran to undergo further examination, the RO should obtain and associate with the claims file all outstanding VA medical records.

round 48, index 63: 
After providing the required notice, the RO should attempt to obtain any additional evidence for which the appellant provides sufficient information and, if necessary, authorization, following the current procedures prescribed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.159 (2006).

round 49, index 4: 
A statement of the case (SOC) was issued in March 1998, and the veteran filed a substantive appeal (via a VA Form 9, Appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals) in June 1998.

round 50, index 5: 
In December 2003, the Board remanded the claim on appeal to the RO for additional development of the evidence.

round 51, index 31: 
In order to be researched, incidents must be reported and documented.").

round 52, index 58: 
The claims file currently includes outpatient treatment records from

round 53, index 67: 
For the sake of efficiency, the RO's adjudication of the claim should include consideration of evidence submitted directly to the Board, notwithstanding the veteran's waiver of RO consideration of the evidence.

round 54, index 6: 
After accomplishing further action, the RO continued the denial of the claim (as reflected in an November 2005 supplemental SOC (SSOC)) and returned this matter to the Board for further appellate consideration.

round 55, index 53: 
The veteran is hereby advised that failure to report for any scheduled VA examination, without good cause, may well result in denial of the claim.

round 56, index 64: 
The actions identified herein are consistent with the duties imposed by the Veterans Claim Act of 2000 (VCAA).

round 57, index 32: 
However, the veteran's alleged in-service stressful experiences also involve his reported voluntary service in Vietnam as a door gunner and an assault while serving in Ethiopia.

round 58, index 30: 
Anecdotal experiences of this type simply cannot be verified independently.

round 59, index 90: 
If the benefit sought on appeal remains denied, the RO must furnish to the veteran and his representative an appropriate supplemental SOC that includes clear reasons and bases for all determinations, and afford them the appropriate time period for response before the claims file is returned to the

