round 0, index 84: 
This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment.

round 1, index 83: 
The appellant has the right to submit additional evidence and argument on the matter the Board has remanded.

round 2, index 82: 
Then afford the Veteran the requisite opportunity to respond before the claims folder is returned to the Board for further appellate action.

round 3, index 85: 
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the Board of Veterans' Appeals or by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims for additional development or other appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.

round 4, index 86: 
Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' AppealsUnder 38 U.S.C.A. ยง 7252 (West 2002), only a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.

round 5, index 87: 
This remand is in the nature of a preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the Board on the merits of your appeal.

round 6, index 69: 
Then, the RO should schedule the Veteran for an examination by a VA medical professional experienced in evaluating post-traumatic stress disorders, to determine the etiology of any psychiatric disorder(s) found to be present.

round 7, index 67: 
Accordingly, the case is REMANDED for the following action:

round 8, index 81: 
Once the above action has been completed, readjudicate the claim and issue a supplemental statement of the case.

round 9, index 68: 
The RO/AMC should obtain all VA medical records regarding the Veteran's treatment for the period from June 2006 to the present, plus any additional private records identified by him. 2.

round 10, index 4: 
The appeal is REMANDED to the RO via the Appeals Management Center (AMC), in Washington, DC.  VA will notify the appellant if further action is required.

round 11, index 70: 
All indicated tests and studies should be accomplished and all clinical findings reported in detail.

round 12, index 79: 
A complete rationale should be provided for any opinion offered.

round 13, index 72: 
The examiner should elicit as much detail as possible from the Veteran as to such claimed stressors, e.g., locations, dates, and identities of individuals involved.

round 14, index 16: 
The Board has reviewed the Veteran's service personnel records, but finds no indication that he was exposed to combat and no information to confirm his claimed stressors.

round 15, index 71: 
The examiner is advised that the Veteran served in Vietnam and maintains that he was exposed to hostile mortar and rocket fire and seeing a man who had his throat slashed and/or head cut off because he fell asleep while on guard duty.

round 16, index 78: 
If the Veteran is found to have a psychiatric disorder other than PTSD, the examiner is requested to provide an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., a likelihood of 50 percent or more) that any currently diagnosed psychiatric disorder is causally related to military service, or whether such a causation or relationship is unlikely (i.e., less than a 50-50 probability).

round 17, index 18: 
He received the Vietnam Service Medal, the Vietnam Campaign Medal and the National Defense Service Medal, but did not receive any decorations or medals which are awarded exclusively for involvement in combat.

round 18, index 66: 
The Veteran is hereby notified that it is the Veteran's responsibility to report for the examination and to cooperate in the development of the case, and that the consequences of failure to report for a VA examination without good cause may include denial of the claim.

round 19, index 77: 
The diagnosis should conform to the psychiatric nomenclature and diagnostic criteria contained in the DSM-IV.

round 20, index 80: 
The Veteran's claims files must be made available to the examiner in conjunction with the examination, and the examination report should indicate the Veteran's medical records were reviewed, including the July 1999 Lafayette Hospital record showing a diagnosis of PTSD, as well as 1997-2002 VA treatment records showing mental health treatment and PTSD and the March 2007 VA treatment record showing PTSD.

round 21, index 75: 
If the Veteran is found to have PTSD, the examiner is requested to identify the diagnostic criteria, including the specific stressor or stressors supporting the diagnosis.

round 22, index 74: 
The diagnosis should conform to the psychiatric nomenclature and diagnostic criteria contained in DSM-IV.

round 23, index 76: 
If PTSD is diagnosed, the examiner is requested to render an opinion as to whether it is at least as likely as not (i.e., a likelihood of 50 percent or more) that any currently diagnosed PTSD is a result of service or whether such an etiology or relationship is unlikely (i.e., less than a 50-50 probability).

round 24, index 14: 
Requisite additional evidence may be obtained from sources other than the Veteran's service medical records.

round 25, index 17: 
The Veteran's DD 214 shows that he served in the United States Army from March 1967 to February 1970.

round 26, index 73: 
Then, the examiner should consider the Veteran's alleged in-service stressors for the purpose of determining whether such stressors were severe enough to have caused the current psychiatric symptoms, and whether the diagnostic criteria to support the diagnosis of PTSD have been satisfied by the in-service stressors.

round 27, index 65: 
As a result, the Board is of the opinion that the Veteran should be afforded another VA examination to determine the etiology of any such claimed psychological disorder found to be present, to include PTSD and its relationship to the Veteran's verified stressors.

round 28, index 5: 
The Veteran seeks service connection for PTSD.

round 29, index 48: 
The next question presented is whether a stressor such as reported by the Veteran is clinically considered to be of sufficient severity to warrant a valid diagnosis of PTSD, consistent with the diagnostic criteria in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed. (1994) (DSM-IV).

round 30, index 2: 
The Board remanded the case for additional development in January 2001 and October 2004.

round 31, index 32: 
However, documentation submitted in October 2008 by the

round 32, index 0: 
The Veteran served on active duty from March 1967 to February 1970, including service in the Republic of Vietnam.

round 33, index 1: 
This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a an April 1999 rating decision of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in New Orleans, Louisiana.

round 34, index 12: 
. . . Where . . .

round 35, index 3: 
The appeal has been returned to the Board for further appellate action.

round 36, index 63: 
Lafayette General Hospital and did not otherwise comment on the 1997 to 2002 VA treatment records showing PTSD, depression and other mental health treatment, or the March 2006 VA treatment record showing a diagnosis of PTSD.

round 37, index 62: 
The Board observes that the examiner therefore did not examine the July 1999 records currently in the claims file from

round 38, index 61: 
The examiner noted that the Veteran had apparently received a diagnosis of PTSD from a clinic in Lafayette, but the records were not available to him.

round 39, index 13: 
VA determines that the Veteran did not engage in combat with the enemy . . . the Veteran's lay testimony, by itself, will not be enough to establish the occurrence of the alleged stressor."

round 40, index 64: 
In addition, the examiner did not comment on any of the Veteran's claimed stressors, as documented in the claims file.

round 41, index 15: 
The Veteran contends that he currently has PTSD as a result of exposure to several in-service stressors, including his base being exposed to enemy rocket and mortar attacks and seeing a man who had his throat slashed and/or his head cut off because he fell asleep while on guard duty.

round 42, index 47: 
Board determines that, giving the Veteran the benefit of the doubt, the Veteran's claimed stressors of undergoing rocket and mortar fire are corroborated by the evidence of record.

round 43, index 46: 
When there is approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.

round 44, index 23: 
A section of the personnel records titled "Campaigns" lists the Vietnamese Counter Offensive PH III, Vietnam Counter Offensives Phase IV & V, Tet Counter Offensive and "Unnamed Campaign."  Such notations regarding campaigns do not establish involvement in combat.

round 45, index 22: 
Throughout the second tour, he was assigned to Company E, U.S. Army Depot, Long Binh.

round 46, index 6: 
Service connection for PTSD currently requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. ยง 4.125(a); (2) a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptoms and an in-service stressor; and (3) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor occurred.

round 47, index 49: 
July 1999 private medical records from Lafayette General

round 48, index 20: 
His listed military occupations were supply clerk, stock control and accounting specialist and equipment store supervisor.

round 49, index 19: 
His service personnel records also show that he was in Vietnam from July 1967 to July 1968 and from February 1969 to February 1970.

round 50, index 8: 
Records for the Veteran's unit corroborated the Veteran's assertion that enemy rocket attacks occurred during the time he was stationed at Da Nang, but did not document his personal participation.

round 51, index 10: 
in that case determined that the Veteran's presence with his unit at the time the attacks occurred corroborated his statement that he experienced such attacks personally.

round 52, index 21: 
During the first Vietnam tour, he was assigned to the 625th Supply and Service Company (DS).

round 53, index 7: 
If the evidence establishes that the Veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and the claimed stressor is related to that combat, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary, and provided that the claimed stressor is consistent with the circumstances, conditions, or hardships of the Veteran's service, the Veteran's lay testimony alone may establish the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressor.

round 54, index 27: 
A medical opinion diagnosing PTSD does not suffice to verify the occurrence of the claimed in-service stressors.

round 55, index 11: 
The evidence required to support the occurrence of an in-service stressor for PTSD varies "depending on whether or not the Veteran was 'engaged in combat with the enemy'.

round 56, index 25: 
In this regard, the Board notes that the Veteran's claimed stressors are somewhat related to combat, but the Veteran was a supply clerk in service and there is no indication he engaged in combat with the enemy.

round 57, index 26: 
The record must contain service records or other corroborative evidence that substantiates or verifies the Veteran's testimony or statements as to the occurrence of the claimed stressors.

round 58, index 9: 
The U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims (Court)

round 59, index 37: 
USARV Circular Number 210-2 shows that 625th Sup & Svc Co was located at An Khe during this time.

