round 0, index 82: 
Service connection for a variously diagnosed psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, is denied.

round 1, index 81: 
Consequently, the benefit of the doubt doctrine does not apply;

round 2, index 80: 
In light of the foregoing, the Board finds that the preponderance of the evidence is against the Veteran's  claim for service connection for a variously diagnosed psychiatric disability (to include PTSD).

round 3, index 79: 
Postservice treatment records note the various other diagnoses and describe treatment, but do not relate any of the diagnoses to service.

round 4, index 78: 
Additionally, there is no competent (medical) evidence of a possible nexus between any of the Veteran's psychiatric diagnoses other than PTSD and his service.

round 5, index 25: 
VA's duty to assist is met.

round 6, index 6: 
The Veteran is not shown to have engaged in combat; there is no credible supporting evidence that a claimed in-service stressor occurred; any recorded diagnosis of PTSD is not based on a stressor event corroborated by independent and credible supporting evidence.

round 7, index 15: 
VCAA notice requirements apply to all five elements of a service connection claim: 1) veteran status; 2) existence of a disability; 3) a connection between the Veteran's service and the disability;

round 8, index 5: 
Under governing regulation, the Board may not provide such services.

round 9, index 14: 
that VA will seek to provide; and (3) that the claimant is expected to provide.

round 10, index 13: 
(2)

round 11, index 7: 
Depressive disorder NOS, adjustment disorder with anxiety and depression, personality disorder NOS with mixed traits, or dysthymia were not manifested in, or shown to be related to, the Veteran's service; a psychosis was not manifested in the first postservice year; a personality disorder (of itself) is not a disease or injury.

round 12, index 17: 
The Veteran was advised of VA's duties to notify and assist in the development of his claim prior to its initial adjudication.

round 13, index 12: 
Upon receipt of a complete or substantially complete application for benefits, VA is required to notify the claimant and his or her representative of any information, and any medical or lay evidence, not of record (1) that is necessary to substantiate the claim;

round 14, index 18: 
An August 2004 letter explained the evidence necessary to substantiate his claim, the evidence VA was responsible for providing, and the evidence he was responsible for providing.

round 15, index 16: 
4) degree of disability; and 5) effective date of the disability.

round 16, index 19: 
A June 2006 letter informed the Veteran of disability rating and effective date criteria.

round 17, index 21: 
The Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) and pertinent postservice treatment records have been secured.

round 18, index 20: 
He has had ample opportunity to respond/supplement the record and has not alleged that notice in this case was less than adequate.

round 19, index 22: 
He has not identified any pertinent evidence that remains outstanding.

round 20, index 11: 
The VCAA applies to the instant claim.

round 21, index 23: 
The RO did not arrange for a VA examination or seek a medical opinion as such is not warranted.

round 22, index 24: 
Absent evidence that any current psychiatric diagnosis is related to service a medical nexus opinion is not warranted.

round 23, index 83: 
Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' Appeals Department of Veterans Affairs

round 24, index 26: 
Accordingly, the Board will address the merits of the claim.

round 25, index 9: 
A. Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA)

round 26, index 35: 
Hence, the Board will summarize the relevant evidence where appropriate and the Board's analysis below will focus specifically on what the evidence shows, or fails to show, as to the claim.

round 27, index 28: 
Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disability was incurred in service.

round 28, index 67: 
however, a lack of specificity in his provided responses coupled with a lack of responses to other requested information precluded verification efforts.

round 29, index 75: 
Thus a threshold requirement for establishing service connection for PTSD is not met.

round 30, index 10: 
The VCAA, in part, describes VA's duties to notify and assist claimants in substantiating a claim for VA benefits.

round 31, index 66: 
He responded with some of the requested information;

round 32, index 8: 
Service connection for variously diagnosed psychiatric disorder to include PTSD is not warranted.

round 33, index 60: 
He relates that a hazard light came on, and the landing was "fast, hard, and very scary", and that his physical reactions at the time included vomiting and loss of bowel control.

round 34, index 1: 
This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a February 2006 rating decision of the Waco, Texas Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

round 35, index 0: 
The appellant is a Veteran who served on active duty from

round 36, index 3: 
Such hearing was scheduled for September 2009.

round 37, index 68: 
Without more specific information the RO was unable verify the alleged stressor.

round 38, index 27: 
B. Legal Criteria, Factual Background, and AnalysisService connection may be established for disability due to disease or injury that was incurred in or aggravated by active service.

round 39, index 73: 
Without evidence that the Veteran engaged in combat or credible supporting evidence of an in-service stressor, even unequivocal medical evidence that a claimant has a diagnosis of PTSD is insufficient to establish that the PTSD is service-related, so as to substantiate a claim of service connection.

round 40, index 74: 
In summary, the record does not show that the Veteran engaged in combat with the enemy and there is no credible supporting evidence of an in-service stressor.

round 41, index 72: 
A medical opinion premised upon an unsubstantiated account is of no probative value and does not serve to verify the occurrence described.

round 42, index 69: 
As there is no credible supporting evidence of an in-service stressor, the record is insufficient to establish that the Veteran has PTSD that is related to an in-service incident.

round 43, index 61: 
He claims that since then being in the proximity of a helicopter causes him to gag and lose his breath, and have daytime nightmares.

round 44, index 52: 
The report also notes the Veteran stated his sleep was poor, appetite was good, and his energy level was good.

round 45, index 77: 
Notably, a personality disorder (of itself, without superimposed pathology) is not considered a disease or injury under regulations governing compensation benefits.

round 46, index 29: 
The determination as to whether these requirements are met is based on an analysis of all the evidence of record and an evaluation of its credibility and probative value.

round 47, index 34: 
Initially, the Board notes that it has reviewed all of the evidence in the Veteran's claims file, with an emphasis on the evidence relevant to this appeal.

round 48, index 57: 
He did not serve during a period of war, and is not shown to have engaged in combat.

round 49, index 76: 
Regarding the various other psychiatric diagnoses diagnosed postservice (depressive disorder NOS, adjustment disorder with anxiety and depression, personality disorder NOS with mixed traits, and dysthymia), none was manifested in service, and a psychosis was not manifested in the first postservice year (so as to trigger application of the chronic disease provisions in 38 U.S.C.A. § 1112; 38 C.F.R. §§ 3.307, 3.309 for), so as to warrant service connection on the basis that the disability became manifest in service and persisted, or on a presumptive basis (for psychosis).

round 50, index 33: 
When all of the evidence is assembled, VA is responsible for determining whether the evidence supports the claim or is in relative equipoise, with the Veteran prevailing in either event, or whether a fair preponderance of the evidence is against the claim, in which case the claim is denied.

round 51, index 65: 
In August 2006 the RO requested further information from the Veteran to allow for stressor verification.

round 52, index 45: 
On December 2000 psychosocial assessment the Veteran reported a long history of depression stemming from being sexually abused as a child.

round 53, index 49: 
A. S., M.D. noted a history of depression NOS, difficult upbringing, unstable adult relationships, irritability and intermittent suicidality.

round 54, index 32: 
When there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.

round 55, index 30: 
Service connection for PTSD requires: (1) medical evidence diagnosing the condition in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 4.125(a); (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor actually occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a link, or causal nexus, between current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor.

round 56, index 31: 
Where the veteran did not engage in combat with the enemy, or the claimed stressors are not related to combat, then the veteran's testimony alone is not sufficient to establish the occurrence of the claimed stressors, and his testimony must be corroborated by credible supporting evidence.

round 57, index 70: 
The Board notes that private treatment records from the Texas Department of Criminal Justice show a diagnosis of PTSD.

round 58, index 50: 
An August 2004 letter from J. R. of "The Right Step" notes the Veteran's participation in a residential treatment program for alcohol dependency from July 1 to July 8, 1997, and indicates that records of such treatment were destroyed.

round 59, index 48: 
He reported a history of being sexually abused by an uncle when he was 6 years old.

