round 0, index 96: 
Service connection for a mental disorder other than PTSD, to include depression and dementia, is denied.

round 1, index 95: 
As the preponderance of the evidence is against the claim, the benefit-of-the-doubt rule is not applicable.

round 2, index 94: 
In conclusion, the evidence of record is against a grant of service connection for a mental disorder other than PTSD, to include depression and dementia.

round 3, index 91: 
Moreover, there are no competent opinions relating either the depression or dementia to military service.

round 4, index 93: 
Accordingly, continuity of symptomatology is not established by either the competent evidence or the Veteran's own statements.

round 5, index 97: 
ANDREW J. MULLEN Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' AppealsDepartment of Veterans Affairs

round 6, index 20: 
He was advised that it is his responsibility to provide or identify, and furnish authorization where necessary for the RO to obtain, any supportive evidence pertinent to his claim.

round 7, index 22: 
In addition, the letter described how VA calculates disability ratings and effective dates.

round 8, index 21: 
Although no longer required, the appellant was also asked to submit evidence and/or information in his possession to the RO.

round 9, index 23: 
The Board finds that the contents of the April 2006 letter satisfied the requirements of 38 U.S.C.A. § 5103(a) and 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(b) regarding VA's duty to notify and assist, including the requirements set forth by the Court in Dingess, supra.

round 10, index 92: 
Indeed, the only competent nexus opinion is unfavorable.

round 11, index 19: 
The letter informed the Veteran that VA would assist him in obtaining evidence necessary to support his claim, such as medical records, employment records, or records from other Federal agencies.

round 12, index 24: 
In addition, the January 2011 SSOC explained the basis for the RO's action and provided him with an additional 60-day period to submit more evidence.

round 13, index 25: 
Thus, it appears that all obtainable evidence identified by the Veteran relative to his claim has been obtained and associated with the claims file, and that neither he nor his representative has identified any other pertinent evidence, not already of record, which would need to be obtained for a fair disposition of this appeal.

round 14, index 18: 
In April 2006, VA sent the Veteran a letter informing him of the types of evidence needed to substantiate his claim and its duty to assist him in substantiating his claim under the VCAA.

round 15, index 33: 
Therefore, no useful purpose would be served in remanding this matter for yet more development.

round 16, index 26: 
It is the Board's conclusion that the Veteran has been provided with every opportunity to submit evidence and argument in support of his claim, and to respond to VA notices.

round 17, index 27: 
With regard to VA's duty to assist, VA obtained the Veteran's service treatment records (STRs) and treatment records from the Huntington VA Medical Center (VAMC).

round 18, index 36: 
II.

round 19, index 14: 
If complete notice is not provided until after the initial adjudication, such a timing error can be cured by subsequent legally adequate VCAA notice, followed by readjudication of the claim, as in a Statement of the Case (SOC) or Supplemental SOC (SSOC).

round 20, index 51: 
When there is an approximate balance in the evidence regarding the merits of an issue material to the determination of the matter, the benefit of the doubt in resolving each such issue shall be given to the claimant.

round 21, index 28: 
As mentioned above, in an October 2009 decision, the Board remanded the claim for further development.

round 22, index 29: 
Specifically, the Board stated that a VA examination was needed to obtain a medical opinion regarding whether there were any psychiatric diagnoses other than PTSD and if so, whether a nexus existed between those diagnoses and active service.

round 23, index 37: 
Service ConnectionA.  Applicable LawService connection may be granted for disability which is the result of disease or injury incurred in or aggravated by service.

round 24, index 38: 
Where there is a chronic disease shown as such in service or within the presumptive period under 38 C.F.R. § 3.307 so as to permit a finding of service connection, subsequent manifestations of the same chronic disease at any later date, however remote, are service connected, unless clearly attributable to intercurrent causes.

round 25, index 32: 
Accordingly, we find that VA has satisfied its duty to assist the Veteran in apprising him as to the evidence needed, and in obtaining evidence pertinent to his claim under the VCAA.

round 26, index 39: 
This rule does not mean that any manifestation in service will permit service connection.

round 27, index 43: 
Service connection may be granted for disease that is diagnosed after discharge, when all the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.

round 28, index 42: 
When the fact of chronicity in service is not adequately supported, then a showing of continuity after discharge is required to support the claim.

round 29, index 89: 
While he appears to be sincere in his belief as to service connection, in light of these factors, the Veteran's current statements to the effect that he has experienced continuous symptomatology since active service, while competent, are not deemed to be credible.

round 30, index 90: 
Therefore, the absence of documented complaints or treatment for nearly four decades following his military discharge is more probative than his current recollection as to symptoms experienced in the distant past.

round 31, index 45: 
(2)

round 32, index 49: 
Id.

round 33, index 0: 
The Veteran had active service from May 1966 to May 1968.

round 34, index 1: 
This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA or Board) from an October 2006 rating decision by the above Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) that denied entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

round 35, index 10: 
Proper notice from VA must inform the claimant of any information and evidence not of record (1) that is necessary to substantiate the claim;

round 36, index 11: 
(2)

round 37, index 40: 
To show chronic disease in service there is required a combination of manifestations sufficient to identify the disease entity, and sufficient observation to establish chronicity at the time, as distinguished from merely isolated findings or a diagnosis including the word "chronic."

round 38, index 44: 
The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims has held that, in order to prevail on the issue of service connection, there must be:  (1) medical evidence of a current disability;

round 39, index 12: 
that VA will seek to provide; and (3) that the claimant is expected to provide, in accordance with 38 C.F.R. § 3.159(b)(1)

round 40, index 50: 
It is the Board's responsibility to evaluate the entire record on appeal.

round 41, index 17: 
In this case, the appellant has not demonstrated any prejudicial or harmful error in VCAA notice, nor, as discussed below, has the Board identified any.

round 42, index 88: 
Following service, there was no documentation of complaints or treatment for depression or dementia until 2005, 37 years after his separation from service.

round 43, index 86: 
The Board must now consider the credibility of such evidence.

round 44, index 87: 
The Veteran's service records show no evidence of any mental disorder or dementia in active service.

round 45, index 15: 
Moreover, where there is an uncured timing defect in the notice, subsequent action by the RO which provides the claimant a meaningful opportunity to participate in the processing of the claim can prevent any such defect from being prejudicial.

round 46, index 85: 
In the present case, the Veteran's sadness, memory problems, and other symptoms are found to be capable of lay observation, and thus his statements constitute competent evidence.

round 47, index 41: 
When the disease identity is established, there is no requirement of evidentiary showing of continuity.

round 48, index 16: 
The U.S. Supreme Court has held that an error in VCAA notice should not be presumed prejudicial, and that the burden of showing harmful error rests with the party raising the issue, to be determined on a case-by-case basis.

round 49, index 13: 
This notice must be provided prior to an initial unfavorable decision on a claim by the RO.

round 50, index 31: 
Thus, it appears that all development requested by this Board in its October 2009 remand has been completed to the extent possible, and no additional development is required.

round 51, index 60: 
A November 2006 treatment note indicates MRI scans of the brain and an electroencephalography were normal.

round 52, index 48: 
While the disease need not be diagnosed within the presumption period, it must be shown, by acceptable lay or medical evidence, that there were characteristic manifestations of the disease to the required degree during that time.

round 53, index 83: 
Furthermore, lay evidence concerning continuity of symptoms after service, if credible, is ultimately competent, regardless of the lack of contemporaneous medical evidence.

round 54, index 84: 
However, the resolution of issues which involve medical knowledge, such as the diagnosis of a disability and the determination of medical etiology, requires professional evidence.

round 55, index 47: 
In addition, the law provides that, where a veteran served ninety days or more of active military service, and certain chronic diseases, such as psychoses (defined in 38 C.F.R. § 3.384), become manifest to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year after the date of separation from such service, such disease shall be presumed to have been incurred in service, even though there is no evidence of such disease during the period of service.

round 56, index 46: 
medical, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence of in-service incurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and (3) medical evidence of a nexus between the claimed in-service disease or injury and the present disease or injury.

round 57, index 30: 
Following the Board's remand, a VA examination was conducted in March 2010 that included a thorough psychiatric evaluation and an opinion regarding whether his other psychiatric diagnoses were related to service.

round 58, index 61: 
In January 2008, the Veteran said, with regard to his depression, that he had good days and bad days, and that bad days were usually related to his family.

round 59, index 62: 
His dementia was an issue for his family.

