round 0, index 49: 
Accordingly, the case is REMANDED for the following action:

round 1, index 50: 
Provide the Veteran with notice regarding the information required by the JSRRC in order to verify a claimed stressor, while allowing him an appropriate amount of time to provide additional information.

round 2, index 51: 
If, the Veteran provides relevant additional information related to his claimed stressors, and the stressors are of sufficient specificity, the RO should attempt to corroborate his allegations with the appropriate research facilities.

round 3, index 52: 
If the stressors are of inadequate specificity to be verified, such a determination should be noted in the record.

round 4, index 48: 
Given the likelihood that these records are relevant to the issues on appeal, an attempt should be made to acquire them.

round 5, index 74: 
Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' AppealsUnder 38 U.S.C.A. ยง 7252 (West 2002), only a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.

round 6, index 73: 
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the Board of Veterans' Appeals or by the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims for additional development or other appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.

round 7, index 72: 
This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment.

round 8, index 71: 
An appropriate period of time should be allowed for responseThe appellant has the right to submit additional evidence and argument on the matter or matters the Board has remanded.

round 9, index 54: 
The AMC should also take action on the JSRRC recommendation to conduct a search of the morning reports submitted by the 20th Engineering Battalion, in order to confirm whether any attacks occurred on that unit from June through August, 1969.  2.

round 10, index 70: 
If the benefit sought on appeal is not granted to the Veteran's satisfaction, he and his representative should be provided with a SSOC.

round 11, index 69: 
After completing the above, and any other development deemed necessary, the RO should readjudicate the Veteran's claim based on the entirety of the evidence.

round 12, index 55: 
Acquire all available VA treatment records from the VA Medical Center in San Juan, Puerto Rico, since 2006 as well as any prior records not already of record should be associated with the claims file.

round 13, index 56: 
The Veteran should also be requested to provide any information regarding additional treatment records that he may have in his possession relating to his psychiatric disorders.

round 14, index 15: 
While the RO attempted to obtain more information from the Veteran, it is unclear whether the morning reports were actually investigated.

round 15, index 2: 
The appeal is REMANDED to the RO via the Appeals Management Center (AMC), in Washington, DC.  VA will notify the appellant if further action is required.

round 16, index 68: 
2) medical records; and 3) lay statements of record. 5.

round 17, index 14: 
The JSRRC also recommended that the RO conduct a search of the morning reports submitted by the 20th Engineering Battalion, in order to confirm whether any attacks occurred on that unit from June through August, 1969.

round 18, index 53: 
The AMC should contact the JSRRC in order to review all relevant records related to the Veteran's claimed stressors for the period from June 1 to July 1, 1969.

round 19, index 7: 
He stated that he was fearful of sniper attacks, and recalled an incident where he was subject to mortar fire.

round 20, index 67: 
In this regard, the examiner should note 1) the Veteran's various alleged service stressors/incidents, which are found in written statements;

round 21, index 46: 
In general, VA is required to obtain relevant records held by any Federal department or agency that the claimant adequately identifies and authorizes the Secretary to obtain.

round 22, index 75: 
This remand is in the nature of a preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the Board on the merits of your appeal.

round 23, index 66: 
The psychiatrist must provide a complete rationale for all opinions offered.

round 24, index 65: 
The claims file must be made available to and reviewed by the examiner.

round 25, index 6: 
In a September 2006 statement, he specifically recounted a time where his unit was installing drainage systems along roadways in June or July of 1969 which required a detached infantry unit for protection.

round 26, index 1: 
This matter is on appeal from an April 2005 decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in San Juan, Puerto Rico.

round 27, index 59: 
If no SSA records are available, it should be so noted in the claims file.

round 28, index 45: 
Finally, the Board notes that the Veteran is in receipt of disability benefits from the Social Security Administration (SSA) since 1999, but there is no indication that there has been an attempt to acquire the treatment records the SSA may possess.

round 29, index 57: 
If he has received additional treatment since this claim was certified for appeal, the RO should attempt to acquire the associated records, after obtaining the Veteran's authorization.

round 30, index 0: 
The Veteran served on active duty from October 1968 to May 1970.

round 31, index 8: 
He also recalled patrolling roadways in search of land mines, where he once saw enemy bodies being moved by loading trucks.

round 32, index 42: 
Id.

round 33, index 18: 
Next, as was noted by the Veteran's representative in May 2011, the provisions relating to the establishment of service connection for PTSD, found at 38 C.F.R. ยง 3.304(f), were amended effective July 13, 2010.

round 34, index 64: 
If the examiner determines that the clinical evidence does not support a diagnosis of PTSD, to include that the claimed stressors do not support the diagnosis, the examiner should list all diagnosed psychiatric disorders and specifically state whether it is at least as likely as not (a 50 percent probability of greater) that any diagnosed psychiatric disorder either began during or was otherwise caused by the Veteran's military service.

round 35, index 28: 
(1)

round 36, index 17: 
Another attempt should be made to acquire these morning reports.

round 37, index 58: 
Obtain the Veteran's SSA records, including the medical evidence used to determine disability eligibility.

round 38, index 13: 
In order to prevent prejudice to the Veteran, the relevant records from June 1969 should be reviewed as well.

round 39, index 60: 
After the above development has been completed and all outstanding records have been associated with the claims file, the Veteran should be scheduled for a VA psychiatric examination, to be conducted by a VA staff or contracted psychiatrist, or a VA staff or contracted psychologist.

round 40, index 47: 
Indeed, the Court has specifically held that where there has been a determination with regard to SSA benefits, the records concerning that decision must be obtained, if relevant.

round 41, index 35: 
The VA noted that limiting the rule to VA associated practitioners, accompanied by periodic review of these examinations, would ensure standardization and consistency.

round 42, index 33: 
The VA provides VA associated practitioners with the veterans' claims folders in connection with all mental-disorder examinations, including PTSD examinations, who are instructed that a PTSD diagnosis cannot occur without a review of the folder.

round 43, index 34: 
(4)

round 44, index 63: 
If a diagnosis of PTSD is deemed appropriate, the examiner must identify the specific stressor(s) underlying the diagnosis, and should comment upon the link between the current symptomatology and the Veteran's claimed stressor(s).

round 45, index 61: 
The VA examiner should determine whether any of the stressors claimed by the Veteran are related to his fear of hostile military or terrorist activity.

round 46, index 30: 
(2)

round 47, index 32: 
(3)

round 48, index 62: 
Thereafter, the VA examiner should confirm whether any of the claimed stressors are adequate to support a diagnosis of PTSD and whether the Veteran's symptoms are related to the claimed stressor(s).

round 49, index 16: 
From the Board's view, the PIES response did not answer the RO's request in this matter, and there is no reference to a morning reports search in the RO's June 2010 formal determination that the stressor information was insufficient.

round 50, index 9: 
Since that time, he asserts that he has experienced symptoms such as nightmares and hypervigilance.

round 51, index 29: 
VA practitioners are given specific instruction on how to conduct PTSD examinations, including guidance materials and a certification process.

round 52, index 31: 
The VA reviews the quality of its practitioners' examinations, including taking steps to address identifiable problems with feedback and training.

round 53, index 44: 
Therefore, given the Veteran's statements of continuous psychiatric symptoms since active duty, a VA opinion is also necessary to consider this issue as well.

round 54, index 5: 
In this case, the Veteran submitted a claim seeking entitlement to service connection for PTSD resulting from his service as a combat engineer in the Republic of Vietnam from April 1969 to May 1970.

round 55, index 43: 
The Veteran has also been diagnosed with major depressive disorder, which has never been considered by the RO, despite the Veteran's statements that he has been experiencing symptoms since active duty.

round 56, index 10: 
In April 2005, the RO recognized that the Veteran had been diagnosed with PTSD by some treating physicians, but denied the Veteran's claim on the basis that his stressors could not be corroborated unless he could provide more accurate information.

round 57, index 41: 
Rather, VA should consider the Veteran's claim as one for any psychiatric disability that may reasonably be encompassed by several factors including: the claimant's description of the claim, the symptoms the claimant describes, and information the claimant submits or VA develops and obtains in connection with the claim.

round 58, index 4: 
For a number of reasons, further development is required prior to adjudication.

round 59, index 27: 
As was noted very recently by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, the reasons for this were several:

