round 0, index 65: 
Service connection for PTSD is denied.

round 1, index 66: 
K. ParakkalVeterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' AppealsDepartment of Veterans Affairs

round 2, index 64: 
Accordingly, the preponderance of the evidence is against the claim for service connection for a right shoulder disability, and there is no reasonable doubt to be resolved.

round 3, index 63: 
The problem in this case is that there is no competent evidence of a psychiatric diagnosis at any time during the current appeal.

round 4, index 28: 
Service connection may be granted if the evidence demonstrates that a current disability resulted from an injury or disease incurred or aggravated in active military service.

round 5, index 7: 
(2)

round 6, index 8: 
that VA will seek to provide; and (3) that the claimant is expected to provide.

round 7, index 6: 
Proper notice from VA must inform the claimant of any information and evidence not of record (1) that is necessary to substantiate the claim;

round 8, index 9: 
This notice must be provided prior to an initial decision on a claim by the RO.

round 9, index 5: 
Upon receipt of a complete or substantially complete application for benefits, VA is required to notify the claimant and his representative of any information, and any medical or lay evidence, that is necessary to substantiate the claim.

round 10, index 4: 
REASONS AND BASES FOR FINDING AND CONCLUSIONDuty to Notify and AssistThe Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA) enhanced VA's duty to notify and assist claimants in substantiating their claim for VA benefits, as codified in pertinent part at 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5103, 5103A, 5107, 5126 (West 2002 & Supp. 2009);

round 11, index 10: 
The VCAA notice requirements apply to all five elements of a service connection claim:  (1) veteran status;

round 12, index 27: 
No useful purpose would be served in remanding this matter for yet more development.

round 13, index 11: 
connection between service and the disability; (4) degree of disability; and (5) effective date of benefits where a claim is granted.

round 14, index 12: 
If complete notice is not provided until after the initial adjudication, such a timing error can be cured by subsequent legally adequate VCAA notice, followed by readjudication of the claim, as in a Statement of the Case (SOC) or Supplemental SOC (SSOC).

round 15, index 29: 
Service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after discharge, when all of the evidence, including that pertinent to service, establishes that the disease was incurred in service.

round 16, index 30: 
To establish entitlement to service connection for PTSD, the record must contain the following:  (1) medical evidence diagnosing PTSD; (2) credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor actually occurred; and (3) medical evidence of a link between current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor.

round 17, index 48: 
The Board does not dispute that the Veteran may experience some sort of symptomatology, but there is no objective clinical confirmation that he suffers from an actual psychiatric disorder and his post-service contention alone cannot satisfy the criteria for a current disability.

round 18, index 13: 
Moreover, where there is an uncured timing defect in the notice, subsequent action by the RO which provides the claimant a meaningful opportunity to participate in the processing of the claim can prevent any such defect from being prejudicial.

round 19, index 14: 
In a pre-adjudication letter dated in June 2007, the RO informed the Veteran of its duty to assist him in substantiating his PTSD claim under the VCAA, and the effect of this duty upon his claim.

round 20, index 32: 
The benefit-of-the-doubt rule is inapplicable when the evidence preponderates against the claim.

round 21, index 31: 
After considering all information and lay and medical evidence of record with respect to benefits under laws administered by the Secretary, when there is an approximate balance of positive and negative evidence regarding any issue material to the determination of a matter, the benefit of the doubt will be given to the claimant.

round 22, index 15: 
This letter also informed him of how disability ratings and effective dates are assigned, if service connection were to be granted.

round 23, index 16: 
He has not demonstrated any error in VCAA notice, and therefore the presumption of prejudicial error as to such notice does not arise in this case.

round 24, index 17: 
The Board also finds that VA has satisfied its duty to assist the Veteran in the development of his PTSD claim.

round 25, index 26: 
Thus, the Board concludes that no further notice or assistance to the Veteran is required to fulfill VA's duty to assist him in the development of his service connection claim.

round 26, index 3: 
Service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder, to include PTSD, is not established.

round 27, index 18: 
His in-service and pertinent post-service treatment reports are of record.

round 28, index 49: 
Indeed, without a finding that the Veteran has been diagnosed with any psychiatric disorder at any time during the appeal period, no valid claim for service connection exists.

round 29, index 47: 
(service connection may not be granted for symptoms unaccompanied by a diagnosed disability).

round 30, index 54: 
Lay evidence can also be competent and sufficient to establish a diagnosis of a condition when (1) a layperson is competent to identify the medical condition, (2) the layperson is reporting a contemporaneous medical diagnosis, or (3) lay testimony describing symptoms at the time supports a later diagnosis by a medical professional.

round 31, index 0: 
The Veteran had active service from April 1968 to March 1970.

round 32, index 1: 
This matter is before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a rating decision in August 2007 by the above Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO).

round 33, index 53: 
When a condition may be diagnosed by its unique and readily identifiable features, the presence of the disorder is not a determination "medical in nature" and is capable of lay observation.

round 34, index 56: 
So to ultimately have probative value, the Veteran's assertions also have to be credible and judged in relation to the other evidence in the file - including any medical evidence addressing the determinative issue of causation.

round 35, index 57: 
That said, the Board notes that the Veteran is not a medical professional, and therefore, his beliefs and statements about medical matters do not constitute competent evidence on matters of medical etiology or diagnosis.

round 36, index 55: 
The Federal Circuit Court also held in Buchanan (and Davidson and Jandreau), however, that the Board retains the discretion to make credibility determinations and otherwise weigh the evidence submitted, including lay evidence.

round 37, index 52: 
In reaching this conclusion, the Board has not overlooked the Veteran's contentions.

round 38, index 19: 
Attempts were made to obtain Social Security Administration records(SSA). SSA indicated that it had made exhaustive efforts and there were no records relating to the Veteran.

round 39, index 20: 
While VA did not provide the Veteran with an examination and/or did not obtain a medical opinion, the Board finds that VA had no obligation to do so in connection with the current appeal because both the STRs and post service treatment records are completely negative for evidence of a diagnosis of PTSD or any other psychiatric disability.

round 40, index 21: 
(holding that, if the evidence of record does not establish that the veteran suffered an event, injury, or disease in service, no reasonable possibility exists that providing a medical examination or obtaining a medical opinion would substantiate the claim);

round 41, index 62: 
(lay person competent to testify to pain and visible flatness of his feet).

round 42, index 43: 
He later submitted records from his former employer, General Motors Corporation (GM) which show he underwent periodic physicals and audiological testing between 1990 and 2004.

round 43, index 22: 
(holding that the Board is not required to accept a medical opinion that is based on the veteran's recitation of medical history);

round 44, index 33: 
The Veteran is seeking service connection for psychiatric problems.

round 45, index 38: 
The existence of a current disability is the cornerstone of a claim for VA disability compensation.

round 46, index 34: 
He asserts that because of his experiences in Vietnam he is sensitive to loud noise and has great difficulty during New Year's and July 4th celebrations.

round 47, index 39: 
In the absence of proof of a present disability, there can be no valid claim.

round 48, index 50: 
Based on this evidentiary posture, service connection cannot be awarded.

round 49, index 35: 
He reports that he underwent an employer-provided psychiatric evaluation with complaints of these problems, but that this occurred before the diagnosis of PTSD was known to most medical specialists.

round 50, index 60: 
Consequently, the probative value of the Veteran's implied or explicit assertions that he has PTSD are greatly outweighed by the objective findings of record.

round 51, index 61: 
(unlike varicose veins or a dislocated shoulder, rheumatic fever is not a condition capable of lay diagnosis) with Jandreau, 492 F.3d at 1376 (lay witness capable of diagnosing dislocated shoulder); Barr, 21 Vet. App. at 308-309 (lay testimony is competent to establish the presence of varicose veins);

round 52, index 44: 
However these records are entirely negative for psychiatric complaints or findings.

round 53, index 25: 
Accordingly, an examination is not required here, even under the low threshold of McLendon.

round 54, index 51: 
Moreover as a clear preponderance of the evidence is against a finding that the Veteran has a current diagnosis of PTSD, consideration of any association between his current symptomatology and his claimed in-service stressors is not necessary.

round 55, index 23: 
(holding that VA is not obligated to provide an examination for a medical nexus opinion where, as here, the supporting evidence of record consists only of a lay statement).

round 56, index 24: 
As discussed in further detail below, the Veteran has failed to submit or identify any medical evidence showing a current psychiatric diagnosis of any kind.

round 57, index 37: 
Although it is unquestioned that the Veteran served in Vietnam during the Vietnam War era, the primary impediment to a grant of service connection in this case is the absence of medical evidence of a current psychiatric disorder.

round 58, index 36: 
The Veteran's DD Form 214 and personnel records, which are already associated with the claims file, indicate that he served in Vietnam as a field communications crewman with the HHSB 6th Battalion 11th Artillery.

round 59, index 45: 
In the absence of a clear psychiatric diagnosis, or symptomatology an award of service connection is not warranted.

