round 0, index 87: 
Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, depression, and anxiety, is denied.

round 1, index 86: 
The preponderance of the evidence is against the claim for service connection for an acquired psychiatric disability, to include PTSD, depression, and anxiety, and the claim is denied.

round 2, index 85: 
Accordingly, their assertions as to medical causation and etiology, absent corroboration by objective medical evidence and opinions, lack sufficient probative value to establish a nexus between his current psychiatric problems and his time in service.

round 3, index 84: 
However, as a lay person, they have not been shown to have the clinical expertise to opine as to medical etiology or to render a medical opinion.

round 4, index 31: 
II.

round 5, index 29: 
Finally, neither the Veteran nor his representative assert that VA failed to comply with 38 C.F.R. § 3.103(c)(2) or identified any prejudice in the conduct of the October 2014 hearing.

round 6, index 17: 
This letter also notified the Veteran of the criteria for assigning a disability rating and an effective date.

round 7, index 20: 
The evidence of record includes service treatment records (STRs), service personnel records, VA treatment records, private treatment records, Social Security Administration (SSA) records, lay statements, and testimony.

round 8, index 30: 
The Board thus finds that he is not prejudiced and the Board can adjudicate the claim.

round 9, index 22: 
Negative replies were received from both agencies.

round 10, index 23: 
The RO subsequently made a formal finding of lack of information to corroborate the alleged stressor.

round 11, index 32: 
Service connection means that the facts, shown by evidence, establish that a particular injury or disease resulting in disability was incurred in the line of duty in the active military service or, if pre-existing such service, was aggravated during service.

round 12, index 19: 
Moreover, the Board finds that VA has complied with its duty to assist the Veteran in the development of his claim.

round 13, index 15: 
By way of a July 2011 pre-adjudication letter, VA notified the Veteran of the information and evidence need to substantiate his service connection claim.

round 14, index 18: 
Accordingly, the Board finds that VA satisfied its duty to notify.

round 15, index 33: 
In order to prevail on the issue of service connection for any particular disability, there must be evidence of a current disability; evidence of in-service occurrence or aggravation of a disease or injury; and medical evidence, or in certain circumstances, lay evidence, of a nexus between an in-service injury or disease and the current disability.

round 16, index 88: 
Alexandra P. SimpsonActing Veterans Law Judge, Board of Veterans' AppealsDepartment of Veterans Affairs

round 17, index 34: 
Service connection for certain chronic diseases, such as psychosis, may also be established based upon a legal "presumption" by showing that it manifested itself to a degree of 10 percent or more within one year from the date of separation from service.

round 18, index 35: 
The option of establishing service connection through a demonstration of continuity of symptomatology rather than through a finding of nexus is specifically limited to the chronic disabilities listed in 38 C.F.R. § 3.309(a).

round 19, index 36: 
(rejecting the argument that continuity of symptomatology in § 3.303(b) has any role other than to afford an alternative route to service connection for specific chronic diseases).

round 20, index 38: 
Service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence establishing a diagnosis of the disorder, credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor(s) actually occurred, and a link, established by medical evidence, between current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor.

round 21, index 37: 
In addition, service connection may be granted for any disease diagnosed after service when all the evidence establishes that the disease was incurred in service.

round 22, index 13: 
The Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (VCAA)

round 23, index 72: 
The inconsistencies of the Veteran's statements are understandable given the memory impairment that resulted from his stroke, but they undermine his credibility nonetheless.

round 24, index 73: 
Therefore, the Board assigns no probative value to the Veteran's claim that he witnessed the decapitated body of his friend.

round 25, index 14: 
VA has a duty to provide notice to the Veteran with respect to establishing entitlement to benefits, and a duty to assist with development of evidence under 38 U.S.C.A. §§ 5103, 5103A (West 2014);

round 26, index 4: 
No additional evidence has been received.

round 27, index 12: 
I.

round 28, index 74: 
The evidence also does not show that the onset of any current psychiatric disorder occurred during service.

round 29, index 83: 
The Veteran and his wife are competent to testify as to the presence of post-service mental health symptoms, which are capable of lay observation.

round 30, index 82: 
The Board is mindful that the Veteran asserts that he has experienced chronic psychiatric problems as a result of his service.

round 31, index 70: 
I could see a lot of blood shooting out his neck.

round 32, index 71: 
The Board acknowledges the Veteran's contention that "everything started coming back again" after his stroke in 2010.

round 33, index 0: 
The Veteran served on active duty from August 1980 to August 1983.

round 34, index 1: 
This matter comes before the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) on appeal from a September 2011 decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in Columbia, South Carolina.

round 35, index 75: 
There is no indication of psychiatric treatment or intervention during the Veteran's active service or for the years immediately following service.

round 36, index 56: 
As an initial matter, the Board finds that the Veteran's statements with respect to the alleged stressor are not credible.

round 37, index 54: 
Service connection cannot be granted in the absence of a current disability.

round 38, index 55: 
The Board also finds that the competent evidence does not show a relationship between the Veteran's service and his currently diagnosed depression and anxiety.

round 39, index 57: 
(VA cannot ignore a veteran's testimony simply because the veteran is an interested party; personal interest may, however, affect the credibility of the evidence).

round 40, index 69: 
His head was in the back windshield and he was still in the driver's seat.

round 41, index 21: 
Additionally, the RO contacted the U.S. Army and Joint Service Records Research Center (JSRRC) and the U.S. Army Crime Records Center in an attempt to corroborate the alleged in-service stressor.

round 42, index 81: 
Thus, presumptive service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder is not warranted.

round 43, index 49: 
After a careful review of the pertinent evidence of record, the Board finds that service connection is not warranted for PTSD or any other acquired psychiatric disability.

round 44, index 28: 
Hence, a remand for an opinion is not necessary to decide this claim.

round 45, index 16: 
This letter requested specific information about the reported stressor.

round 46, index 66: 
[W]e had guard duty and it was raining.

round 47, index 5: 
The AOJ issued a Statement of the Case (SOC) in May 2013.

round 48, index 3: 
In October 2014, the Veteran and his wife testified at a video conference hearing before the undersigned Acting Veterans Law Judge.  A transcript of the hearing is associated with the claims file, which reflects that the Board would keep the record open for a period of 30 days for the submission of additional evidence.

round 49, index 48: 
His symptoms have been alternately diagnosed as depression and anxiety.

round 50, index 67: 
And I told him, we had [sic] another friend told him, wait till -- wait till the next day before you go, because he was going downtown because he had a girl friend, and he never made it.

round 51, index 60: 
"He did not see this, but heard about it from friends."

round 52, index 80: 
Finally, the competent evidence of record does not show that psychosis was diagnosed within one year of separation.

round 53, index 52: 
However, the fact that the Veteran had a positive PTSD screen does not constitute evidence of a competent diagnosis of PTSD.

round 54, index 47: 
Shortly thereafter, he began seeking ongoing outpatient treatment for mental health problems.

round 55, index 40: 
Specifically, he claims that he saw the decapitated body of his friend.

round 56, index 41: 
The Veteran maintains that he developed permanent psychiatric trauma as a result of that in-service stressor.

round 57, index 42: 
A review of the Veteran's STRs fails to show any treatment for, or diagnosis of, any psychiatric complaints.

round 58, index 76: 
Indeed, the earliest showing of psychiatric complaints is in 2010, which is more than 25 years following service discharge.

round 59, index 58: 
He has provided inconsistent accounts regarding whether he actually witnessed the aftermath of the accident.

