round 0, index 29: 
All records obtained should be associated with the claims folder.

round 1, index 30: 
The RO should request from the veteran a comprehensive statement containing as much detail as possible regarding the stressors to which he alleges he was exposed in service.

round 2, index 28: 
When the veteran responds and provides any necessary authorizations, the named health care providers should be contacted and asked to submit copies of all medical records documenting their treatment which are not already in the claims folder.

round 3, index 27: 
The RO should take appropriate action to contact the veteran and request the names, addresses, and approximate dates of treatment of all health care providers (VA and non-VA) who have treated him for psychiatric problems prior to, during, and after service.

round 4, index 26: 
Accordingly, the case is hereby REMANDED for the following actions:1.

round 5, index 31: 
The veteran should be asked to provide specific details of the claimed stressful events during service, such as dates, places, detailed descriptions of events and identifying information concerning any other individuals involved in the events, including their names, ranks, units of assignment or any other identifying detail.

round 6, index 40: 
If the diagnosis of PTSD is deemed appropriate, the examiner should comment upon the link between the current symptomatology and one or more of the in-service stressors found to be established by the RO.

round 7, index 41: 
The report of examination should include the complete rationale for all opinions expressed.

round 8, index 25: 
If indicated, the RO should then schedule a VA psychiatric examination.

round 9, index 39: 
The examiner should integrate any previous psychiatric findings and diagnoses with current findings to obtain a true picture of the nature of the veteran's psychiatric status.

round 10, index 38: 
The examination report should reflect review of pertinent material in the claims folder.

round 11, index 9: 
A review of the record indicates that further development remains to be accomplished.

round 12, index 37: 
The RO must specify for the examiner the stressor or stressors that it has determined are established by the record and the examiner must be instructed that only those events may be considered for the purpose of determining whether exposure to a stressor in service has resulted in current psychiatric symptoms and, whether the diagnostic criteria to support the diagnosis of PTSD have been satisfied.

round 13, index 36: 
If, and only if, the RO determines that the record establishes the existence of a stressor or stressors, then the RO should arrange for the veteran to be accorded a VA psychiatric examination to determine the diagnosis of all psychiatric disorders that are present.

round 14, index 43: 
Related post- traumatic stress disorders, should be accomplished.

round 15, index 24: 
In view of the foregoing, it is the Board’s judgment that the RO should obtain additional information from the veteran regarding his alleged in-service stressors and forward this information to the USASCRUR for verification of the stressors.

round 16, index 8: 
These are reported to include: being under life threatening sniper fire, working as a combat engineer in outlying locations in daily fear of Vietcong attack, viewing the aftermath of a battle in the Ben Cat area, seeing bodies in bags at an airport, viewing casualties at the Long Bien field hospital, and seeing child victims of the war.

round 17, index 44: 
The claims folder, or copies of all pertinent records, must be made available to the examiner for review in connection with the examination.

round 18, index 35: 
They should again be requested to provide any information that might corroborate the veteran's alleged stressors. 4.

round 19, index 34: 
This summary, together with a copy of the DD 214 and the DA Form 20, or equivalent, and all associated documents, should be sent to the USASCRUR, 7798 Cissna Road, Springfield, Virginia 22150.

round 20, index 42: 
All necessary special studies or tests, to include psychological testing and evaluation, such as the Mississippi Scale for Combat-

round 21, index 32: 
The veteran is advised that this information is vitally necessary to obtain supportive evidence of the stressful events and that he must be as specific as possible because without such details an adequate search for verifying information cannot be conducted. 3.

round 22, index 45: 
The RO should then review the record and the claim should be readjudicated.

round 23, index 22: 
Likewise, if the examiner(s) render a diagnosis of PTSD that is not clearly based upon stressors in service whose existence the adjudicators have accepted, the examination would be inadequate for rating purposes.

round 24, index 33: 
With the additional information obtained and the evidence currently of record, the RO should review the file and prepare a summary of all the claimed stressors.

round 25, index 49: 
The purpose of this action is to comply with the holdings of the Court.

round 26, index 12: 
Although the veteran has provided some detailed information regarding the claimed stressors, the RO should make an additional request for information and forward this information to the USASCRUR.

round 27, index 56: 
This remand is in the nature of a preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the Board on the merits of your appeal.

round 28, index 47: 
The veteran and his representative should be afforded the applicable time to respond.

round 29, index 46: 
If the determination remains adverse to the veteran, both he and his representative should be provided a supplemental statement of the case which includes a summary of additional evidence submitted, any additional applicable laws and regulations, and the reasons for the decision.

round 30, index 51: 
The veteran need take no action until notified.

round 31, index 6: 
It appears that the RO has denied the veteran’s claim because of a lack of a verified stressor in service.

round 32, index 0: 
The veteran served on active duty with the Army from March 1964 to March 1966, including service in Vietnam from August 1965 to February 1966.

round 33, index 1: 
This case comes before the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) on appeal from an April 1995 RO rating decision which denied the veteran’s claim for entitlement to service connection for PTSD.

round 34, index 55: 
BARBARA B. COPELAND	Member, Board of Veterans' AppealsUnder 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States Court of Veterans Appeals.

round 35, index 48: 
The case should then be returned to the Board for further appellate review.

round 36, index 52: 
This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment by the RO.

round 37, index 50: 
The Board does not indicate any factual or legal conclusion as to any final outcomes warranted in the appeal.

round 38, index 10: 
In particular, although the RO sent information provided by the veteran in support of his stressors to the U.S. Army and Joint Services Environmental Support Group (ESG) [now renamed the U.S. Armed Services Center for Research of Unit Records (USASCRUR)], it does not appear that a report of its findings has been associated with the claims file.

round 39, index 21: 
In other words, if the adjudicators determine that the existence of an alleged stressor or stressors in service is not established by the record, a medical examination to determine whether PTSD due to service is present is pointless.

round 40, index 20: 
In such a referral, the adjudicators should specify to the examiner(s) precisely what stressors have been accepted as established by the record, and the medical examiner(s) must be instructed that only those events may be considered in determining whether stressors to which the veteran was exposed during service were of sufficient severity as to have resulted in current psychiatric symptoms.

round 41, index 54: 
In addition, VBA’s ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE MANUAL, M21-1, Part IV, directs the ROs to provide expeditious handling of all cases that have been remanded by the Board and the Court.

round 42, index 53: 
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the Board of Veterans’ Appeals or by the United States Court of Veterans Appeals for additional development or other appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.

round 43, index 3: 
A transcript of that hearing is on file.

round 44, index 13: 
In adjudicating a claim for service connection for PTSD, the Board is required to evaluate the supporting evidence in light of the places, types, and circumstances of service, as evidenced by the veteran's military records, and all pertinent medical and lay evidence.

round 45, index 11: 
As information in addition to that which was already sent to the USASCRUR has now been added to the claims file, the Board has determined that the RO should forward to the USASCRUR any additional information regarding the veteran's unit of assignment, and his duties and responsibilities during his tour in Vietnam, and an account of his particularly stressful experiences.

round 46, index 23: 
Court set out guidelines for PTSD claims.

round 47, index 18: 
Upon reviewing Zarycki and West, it appears that in approaching a claim for service connection for PTSD, the question of the existence of an event claimed as a recognizable stressor must be resolved by adjudicatory personnel.

round 48, index 19: 
If the adjudicators conclude that the record establishes the existence of such a stressor or stressors, then, and only then, the case should be referred for a medical examination to determine the sufficiency of the stressor and whether the remaining elements required to support the diagnosis of PTSD have been met.

round 49, index 7: 
Through the course of his appeal, the veteran has asserted that certain stressful incidents which occurred while serving in Vietnam led to the development of PTSD.

round 50, index 16: 
In West, the Court held that the sufficiency of the stressor is a medical determination, and therefore adjudicators may not render a determination on this point in the absence of independent medical evidence.

round 51, index 2: 
The veteran testified at a personal hearing before a member of the Board on travel section at the RO in July 1997.

round 52, index 17: 
The Court also held in West that a psychiatric examination for the purpose of establishing the existence of PTSD was inadequate for rating purposes because the examiners relied, in part, on events whose existence the Board had rejected.

round 53, index 15: 
In Zarycki, the Court held that in addition to demonstrating the existence of a stressor, the facts must also establish that the alleged stressful event was sufficient to give rise to PTSD.

round 54, index 5: 
The claims file includes medical evidence showing a current diagnosis of PTSD.

round 55, index 0: 
The veteran served on active duty with the Army from March 1964 to March 1966, including service in Vietnam from August 1965 to February 1966.

round 56, index 0: 
The veteran served on active duty with the Army from March 1964 to March 1966, including service in Vietnam from August 1965 to February 1966.

round 57, index 14: 
Additionally, service connection for PTSD requires medical evidence establishing a clear diagnosis of the condition, credible supporting evidence that the claimed in-service stressor actually occurred, and a link, established by the medical evidence, between current symptomatology and the claimed in-service stressor.

round 58, index 0: 
The veteran served on active duty with the Army from March 1964 to March 1966, including service in Vietnam from August 1965 to February 1966.

round 59, index 0: 
The veteran served on active duty with the Army from March 1964 to March 1966, including service in Vietnam from August 1965 to February 1966.

