round 0, index 92: 
A complete rationale for all opinions expressed by the examiner must be provided.

round 1, index 93: 
The RO should then review the veteran’s claims file and ensure that the examination report is responsive to the Board’s request.

round 2, index 91: 
The examiner should be asked to distinguish, if possible, the symptomatology of any other psychiatric disorder identified, from PTSD, if identified.

round 3, index 94: 
The claim should be readjudicated with consideration of all pertinent law, regulations, and Court decisions.

round 4, index 102: 
This remand is in the nature of a preliminary order and does not constitute a decision of the Board on the merits of your appeal.

round 5, index 101: 
MARK D. HINDIN	Member, Board of Veterans' AppealsUnder 38 U.S.C.A. § 7252 (West 1991), only a decision of the Board of Veterans' Appeals is appealable to the United States Court of Veterans Appeals.

round 6, index 58: 
The RO should contact the veteran and request that he provide any necessary additional information regarding stressors, the units, dates and locations of all of his military assignments while in Vietnam, and describe his duties at each location.

round 7, index 59: 
He should attempt to identify the date of each stressor incident, as well as the name and/or location of any area where such events took place.

round 8, index 57: 
Accordingly, the case is REMANDED for the following:

round 9, index 90: 
Further, the examiner should identify any and all other psychiatric disorders present, and indicate whether any is related to service.

round 10, index 60: 
He should identify other individuals who were involved in or witnessed the incidents he has previously described.

round 11, index 95: 
The applicable response time should be allowed.

round 12, index 78: 
After obtaining appropriate authorization, the RO should attempt to obtain the medical records that are not already in the claims file.

round 13, index 89: 
The examiner also should specify: (1) whether stressor(s) found to be established by the record by the RO were sufficient to produce PTSD; and (2) whether there is a link between the current symptomatology and one or more of the in- service stressors found to be established by the record by the RO and found to be sufficient to produce PTSD by the examiners.

round 14, index 61: 
He should indicate whether the events he claims as stressors were related to any specific operations or missions, and if so, name them.

round 15, index 62: 
He should be asked to provide, to the best of his knowledge, detailed accounts of the incidents involving the mortar attack on his unit’s post in December 1968, at Moc Hoa;  a Cobra helicopter pilot or gunner dying in his arms in May 1969, at Tam Ky Airport;  being under sniper fire and witnessing the death of a serviceman by being crushed under an Army vehicle in March 1969, in Katum;  and, in March or April of 1969, coming under rocket and small arms attack in Song Be.  He should include any further information as to where he was when the incidents occurred, the dates, times, locations, and witnesses to each, his specific involvement or role in each incident, the unit he was assigned at the time of each claimed incident, and the outcome of each incident.

round 16, index 88: 
If a diagnosis of PTSD is made, the examiner should state which of the diagnostic criteria of DSM-IV or DSM-III for PTSD have and have not been satisfied and provide a detailed description and discussion of the complaints and findings that satisfy the criteria.

round 17, index 97: 
The veteran need take no action unless otherwise notified.

round 18, index 87: 
In that regard the examiner’s attention is directed to the applicable portions of the DSM-III and DSM-IV.

round 19, index 80: 
Any response to the RO’s requests should be included in the claims file.

round 20, index 77: 
The RO should also request that the veteran identify all treatment or evaluation he has received for panic attacks, an anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, PTSD, and any other psychiatric disorders, or substance abuse since service, including the dates of treatment, and the names and addresses of all physicians and facilities that have treated him.

round 21, index 70: 
The RO should submit to USASCRUR a copy of this remand, a list of the veteran’s unit and locations during his service in Vietnam, and all claimed stressors with any available details, a copy of the veteran’s DD Form 214 and his service personnel records, and all stressor information in the file.

round 22, index 96: 
Thereafter, the case should be returned to the Board, if in order.

round 23, index 86: 
Specifically, the examiner must determine whether or not the veteran has PTSD.

round 24, index 98: 
This claim must be afforded expeditious treatment by the RO.

round 25, index 63: 
Any other claimed stressors should be similarly detailed.

round 26, index 100: 
In addition, VBA’s ADJUDICATION PROCEDURE MANUAL, M21-1, Part IV, directs the ROs to provide expeditious handling of all cases that have been remanded by the Board and the Court.

round 27, index 76: 
If the veteran has identified any individuals who were also present, or were injured or killed during the event, the RO should try to obtain verification that such individuals served with the veteran’s unit, or were in the area at the time of the cited event.

round 28, index 99: 
The law requires that all claims that are remanded by the Board of Veterans’ Appeals or by the United States Court of Veterans Appeals for additional development or other appropriate action must be handled in an expeditious manner.

round 29, index 84: 
The examination should include psychological tests with PTSD subscales, the results of which should be reviewed before a final psychiatric diagnosis is given.

round 30, index 75: 
If verification is not available through USASCRUR, the RO should determine any source from which it might be obtained and then try to obtain it.

round 31, index 7: 
The veteran has reported various stressors experienced while serving in Vietnam.

round 32, index 0: 
The veteran served on active duty from June 1963 to June 1983.

round 33, index 1: 
This matter comes to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (Board) on appeal from the August 1995 Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) rating decision which denied service connection for `PTSD, granted service connection for paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, assigned a 10 percent disability evaluation, and granted an increased evaluation to 30 percent for the veteran’s service-connected low back disorder.

round 34, index 5: 
In December 1994, the same physician reported only an impression of panic attacks.

round 35, index 85: 
The RO must specify for the examiner any stressor(s) that it has determined are established by the record and the examiner must be instructed that only those events may be considered for the purpose of determining whether the veteran was exposed to a stressor in service.

round 36, index 83: 
The entire claims folder and a copy of this remand must be made available to the examiner prior to the examination, the receipt of which must be acknowledged in the examination report.

round 37, index 69: 
After the above has been completed to the extent possible, the RO must refer the case to the U.S. Armed Services Center for Research of Unit Records (USASCRUR) (formerly known as the United States Army and Joint Services Environmental Support Group (ESG)) to determine whether there is any evidence that the veteran engaged in combat with the enemy during his service in Vietnam, and whether there is corroboration of the incidents described by the veteran in his statements and hearing testimony.

round 38, index 68: 
Efforts to locate medical records pertaining to the veteran’s hospitalization in February and March of 1969, while stationed in Vietnam, should be made and documented in the claims file.

round 39, index 74: 
If the veteran can not provide a specific date of a cited incident, unit records or logs for the period of the veteran’s service with that unit should be requested.

round 40, index 19: 
The veteran’s available service medical records do not indicate that he was treated for any psychological complaints or illness during service.

round 41, index 66: 
The veteran should be given a reasonable amount of time in which to respond.

round 42, index 67: 
The National Personnel Records Center should be contacted for any additional personnel or service medical records regarding the veteran’s period of active duty while enlisted, from June 1963 to December 1971, including any additional DD-214 forms which may not be of record at this time.

round 43, index 34: 
Vietnam, a Cobra helicopter emergency landed at the veteran’s air strip, and the veteran and others in his unit pulled the injured pilot and the gunner from the helicopter.

round 44, index 79: 
Included should be records of all periods of treatment at the Vet Center of Midland, Texas, and records from treatment by Mr. Vincent, certified counselor, of Abeline, Texas, and Dr. Pollard, of Dyess Air Force Base Hospital, Texas.

round 45, index 82: 
The veteran should be informed upon notification of the examination of the potential consequences of his failure to attend and cooperate with the examination.

round 46, index 20: 
However, the veteran’s representative has argued in the Informal Hearing

round 47, index 39: 
In March or April of 1969, in Song Be, Vietnam, the veteran’s unit came under rocket and small arms attack from the enemy, leaving several of the veteran’s unit wounded

round 48, index 64: 
The veteran must be asked to be as specific as possible because, without such details, an adequate search for corroborating information cannot be conducted.

round 49, index 71: 
The RO should also refer to the statements provided by the veteran, as well as his hearing testimony for this information.

round 50, index 35: 
The warrant officer gunner, died in the veteran’s arms, and the pilot was evacuated from the scene with multiple wounds.

round 51, index 36: 
The veteran does not know the name of either man.

round 52, index 33: 
In mid-May 1969, at Tam Ky Airport, in

round 53, index 65: 
The veteran should be informed of the possible consequences of his failure to supply adequate information regarding his claimed stressors, namely that if they cannot be corroborated, his claim may be denied.

round 54, index 31: 
The veteran’s unit was attacked by the enemy with mortars, in December 1968, while at Moc Hoa, Vietnam.

round 55, index 8: 
A service acquaintance has supplied a statement dated in January 1997, which could be viewed as corroborating one of the veteran’s reported stressors.

round 56, index 54: 
The veteran was afforded a VA examination to evaluate him for PTSD in February 1997.

round 57, index 55: 
The examiner concluded that though the veteran appeared to have developed symptoms related to his panic disorder (without agoraphobia) during active service, that any causal relationship to combat experience was “tenuous”, and that late-onset PTSD had not yet been clearly identified in the veteran.

round 58, index 21: 
Presentation, dated in October 1997, that the veteran’s complete service medical records have not been obtained, and that he was treated during service for psychiatric problems while receiving inpatient treatment for low back pain, in February and March 1969.

round 59, index 56: 
In the event that the RO is able to verify the veteran’s combat stressors, or non-combat stressors, a complete psychiatric evaluation is in order, as there can be no grant of service connection for PTSD without sufficient findings of a medical diagnosis based on a verified stressor or stressors.

