This appeal to the Board of Veterans' Appeals (Board) arose from an October 2002 rating decision by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Regional Office (RO) in Los Angeles, California.
Entitlement to service connection for an acquired psychiatric disorder other than posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
The Veteran had honorable active service from August 1980 to August 1984 and from April 1985 to September 1985.
A subsequent enlistment from September 1985 to August 1990 resulted in an other-than-honorable character of discharge, but a July 1991 character of discharge determination-recently associated with the claims file on remand-found that, because the Veteran's actions did not constitute willful and persistent misconduct, this period of service "is considered to be under honorable conditions for VA purposes."
Resolving doubt in the Veteran's favor, the Veteran's acquired psychiatric disorder other than PTSD-variously diagnosed as bipolar disorder, depression, and anxiety-was incurred during active duty service.
Contrary to the negative VA addendum opinion, the Veteran submitted a July 2014 DBQ from his private psychologist that specifically determined that "while depression and anxiety have existed for many years, period of time in Desert Storm [] greatly increased his deterioration."
Furthermore, the Veteran also submitted a September 2014 statement from the Veteran's treating psychologist at VA, who determined that the Veteran's "symptoms, significantly affecting his daily functioning, have reportedly been persistent since his time in the service.
Because both the private psychologist and the Veteran's treating psychologist take into account the lengthy history and plethora of psychiatric symptoms demonstrated in the record over the years, including those noted during service (unlike the negative VA opinion), the Board finds these positive opinions to be highly probative.
In fact, the Board can find no adequate basis to reject the positive evidence of record demonstrating that the Veteran's current psychiatric disorder continuously existed since his last period of service, based on a lack of credibility or probative value.
Service connection for a psychiatric disorder other than PTSD is granted.